Results. . Generation of a Hypomorphic Mutant Reveals Different CUL3 Functions during Arabidopsis Development. Previously it was shown that the combined disruption of both Arabidopsis CUL3A and CUL3B genes causes embryo lethality [15]-[17]. To further investigate the function of CUL3 in plants, we searched for additional Arabidopsis T-DNA insertion lines. One line was of particular interest as the T-DNA was inserted at the very end of the CUL3A coding sequence. This mutant allele, called cul3a-3 was further characterised. The T-DNA insertion creates a mutation, in which the last two amino acids of the protein are replaced by an eight-residue peptide (Figure 1A). The cul3a-3 mutant line produces a lower abundant truncated transcript (Figure 1B). Interestingly, the CUL3A protein detected by a specific anti-peptide antibody [18] was not only less abundant, but was also hyper-rubylated (Figure 1C), suggesting that the truncated CUL3A protein is less prone to de-rubylation. It is noteworthy that cycles of rubylation/de-rubylation are important for CRLs activity (reviewed in [22]).. . 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000328.g001. Figure 1. . The cul3hyp displays multiple developmental abnormalities.. A. Schematic representation of T-DNA insertions in both CUL3A and CUL3B genes. LB and RB indicate the orientation of the left and right T-DNA borders, respectively. Exons (open boxes), introns (single lines) and 5 and 3UTRs (dots) are indicated. Below, C-terminal protein sequence of CUL3A aligned with the cul3a-3 mutant protein. The extra eight-residue peptide is indicated in bold. B. CUL3A transcript level in wild type and mutant plant. RNA was extracted from 3-week-old plants. C. CUL3A protein detected by a CUL3A-specific anti-peptide antibody. Proteins were extracted from 3-week-old wild-type and mutant plants as indicated. Rubylated and unrubylated CUL3A proteins are indicated. The panel below shows the percentage of rubylated CUL3A protein in wild type and cul3hyp. Data are means of 3 different western blots SE. D. 10-day old cul3hyp mutant seedlings showing cotyledon phenotype. E. Venation defects of cul3hyp cotyledon. F. 4-day-old light grown wild type and cul3hyp mutant seedlings. G. 58-day-old wild type and cul3hyp mutant plants under short days conditions.. . . . Homozygous cul3a-3 mutant plants are fertile and do not show morphological defects under normal growth conditions. As CUL3A and CUL3B genes are functionally redundant, we generated a double mutant using the previously characterized cul3b-1 knockout line [17]. The double homozygous cul3a-3 cul3b-1 mutant, hereafter called cul3 hypomorph (cul3hyp), was viable, but exhibited several developmental defects. Approximately 10% of homozygous cul3hyp seedlings displayed altered cotyledon phenotypes (Table 1). Some seedlings exhibited a single cotyledon while others, at a lower frequency, had three cotyledons (Figure 1D); seedlings with partially or totally fused cotyledons were also observed (not shown). In addition, the vascular patterning of cotyledons was often abnormal (Figure 1E). In particular, we observed interrupted and freely ending veins. In less than 1% of these seedlings we observed other abnormalities, such as root-less seedlings (not shown). The absence of root meristem was previously revealed in some of the Arabidopsis cul3a-1 cul3b-1 double null mutants that could complete their embryonic development [17].. . 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000328.t001. Table 1. . Scoring of the cotyledon phenotype observed with cul3hyp seedlings.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Alles. Dicotyledons. Monocotyledon. Tricotyledons. Fused cotyledons. Seedlings scored. . . . . Wild type. 1010. 0. 0. 0. 1010. . . . cul3hyp. . 2637 (89.25%). 225 (7.61%). 64 (2.16%). 29 (0.98%). 2955. . . . . . The subset of cul3hyp seedlings that had normal organ patterning displayed epinastically curled cotyledons and shorter roots when grown in the light (Figure 1F). At a latter stage of development, the most striking phenotype was a reduced rosette size and a delay in flowering (Figure 1G). Consistently, a slight delay in flowering was observed in single cul3a-1 loss-of-function mutant [18].. Overall, our data indicate that Arabidopsis CUL3A and CUL3B are important for plant growth and development, both during embryogenesis and at post-embryonic stages.. . . The cul3hyp Double Mutant Displays a Triple Response in the Absence of Ethylene. Because ETO1 is involved in the ethylene biosynthetic pathway and physically interacts with Arabidopsis CUL3A [20], most likely through its BTB domain, we investigated whether the cul3hyp mutant is affected in ethylene-mediated processes. In accordance with this speculation, etiolated cul3hyp mutants displayed a typical triple response in the absence of ethylene, which is characterized by short hypocotyls, short roots, and exaggerated apical hooks (Figure 2). The phenotype was similar to that of eto1-1, though less severe than the constitutive triple response1 (ctr1-1) mutant. It is noteworthy that the single cul3a-3 mutant displayed a weak triple response. Moreover, when germinated in the presence 5 M ACC, the cul3hyp mutant was still responsive to ethylene in a root elongation assay (Figure S1).. . 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000328.g002. Figure 2. . The cul3hyp mutant exhibits the triple response in the dark.. A. Phenotypes of 3-day-old etiolated seedlings of the indicated genotypes grown without ACC. B. Hypocotyl (light grey) and root (dark grey) length measurements of 3-day-old etiolated seedlings of the indicated genotypes grown without ACC. Values are average lengths (meansSD) of >30 hypocotyls or roots. T-tests were performed for each value compared to WT (the triple mutants were compared to their corresponding ethylene-insensitive mutants) indicating significant differences (p<0.05). The (*) symbol highlights values for which p>0.05.. . . . To better characterize whether the CUL3A and CUL3B genes are involved in the control of ethylene biosynthesis or might also play functions further downstream in the signalling cascade, we first used a pharmacological approach. We found that treatment with 2 M aminoethoxyvinyl glycine (AVG), which inhibits ACC synthase and hence ethylene biosynthesis [23], significantly reversed the cul3hyp triple response (Figure S1). However, AVG has toxic effects and it inhibited root elongation of wild-type plants even at low concentrations (not shown).. Thus, we undertook a genetic approach and generated triple mutant combinations with ethylene-insensitive or resistant mutants in the ethylene-signalling cascade. In all triple mutants, etr1-1 cul3hyp, ein2-1 cul3hyp and ein3-1 cul3hyp, the triple response observed in the cul3hyp hypomorph was significantly, but not entirely suppressed (Figure 2). We conclude that the triple response phenotype of cul3hyp can be mostly explained by a function of CUL3A and CUL3B upstream of ethylene perception. However, the fact that both hypocotyl and root length were slightly reduced in all three triple mutants compared to their corresponding single ethylene insensitive or resistant mutants indicates that Arabidopsis CUL3 genes act also at other levels, which are ethylene independent.. . . Ethylene Production of cul3hyp Is Significantly Enhanced by the eto1-1 and etr1-1 Mutations. We generated an eto1-1 cul3hyp triple mutant and found only a slight additive effect on the triple response regarding root growth (Figure S1). These data indicate that the triple response observed in cul3hyp is mainly attributed to a defect in the CUL3ETO1 E3 ligase, but does not exclude the possibility that the two ETO1-related proteins, EOL1 and/or EOL2 [20] may also play some minor roles in this process.. As a next step, we measured ethylene emission between day 3 and day 4 in the etiolated mutant seedlings. Consistently, the cul3hyp mutant accumulated two to three-fold more ethylene gas than did the wild type control (Figure 3A), but significantly less than eto1 seedlings. To further confirm that the triple response observed in the etiolated seedlings is the consequence of CUL3A/B knockdown, we transformed the cul3hyp double mutant with a binary vector spanning a CUL3A genomic fragment [18]. Several transformants were recovered, which suppressed the triple response (not shown) as well as ethylene overproduction (Figure 3A).. . 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000328.g003. Figure 3. . Ethylene production and ACS5 turnover in the cul3hyp mutant.. A. Ethylene emission from combinatorial mutants of the indicated genotypes. Etiolated seedlings were grown in sealed vials and the amount of ethylene released was quantified by gas chromatography (pL, pico Liter). Each bar represents the average (SE) of three separate vials with each vial measured in triplicate. B. The half-life of myc-ACS5 is increased in cul3hyp mutant seedlings. Wild type (left panel) or cul3hyp mutant (right panel) seedlings harbouring the myc-ACS5 transgene were grown for 4 days on MS medium containing either 1 nM DEX (wild type) or 10 nM DEX (cul3hyp) in the dark. The seedlings were washed in liquid MS medium lacking DEX and then suspended in liquid MS medium lacking DEX but containing the protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide at time 0. At various times (indicated in minutes above each lane), the seedlings were harvested, and protein extracts were analyzed by immunoblotting using an anti-myc monoclonal antibody. C. Phenotypes of 3-day-old etiolated seedlings of the indicated genotypes grown without ACC (left panel). Hypocotyl (light gray) and root (dark gray) length measurements of 3-day-old etiolated seedlings of the indicated genotypes grown without ACC (right panel). Values are average lengths (meansSD) of >30 hypocotyls or roots. For all mutants (except cin5-3) p<0.05 compared to wild type plants.. . . . Because the triple response of the eto1-1 cul3hyp triple mutant was slightly more severe than in the eto1-1 single mutant (Figure S1), we measured ethylene production in the triple eto1-1 cul3hyp mutant (Figure 3A). There was an increase of about 3-fold in ethylene production as compared to the eto1-1 parent, suggesting that CUL3A/B controls ethylene production by both ETO1-dependent and independent mechanisms.. There was also an increase of about 3-fold in ethylene production in the etr1-1 cul3hyp mutant compared to etr1-1 (Figure 3A). Likewise, ethylene production was increased in the ein3-1 cul3hyp triple mutant compared to the cul3hypparent, despite the fact that ein3-1 does not overproduce ethylene. This data indicates that CUL3A/B acts additively with the autoinhibition control of ethylene biosynthesis.. . . ACS5 Is a Target of CUL3 in Arabidopsis. ETO1 directly interacts with ACS5 to inhibit its activity, but also mediates ACS5 26S proteasome-dependent degradation, most likely via CUL3A/B [20]. Moreover, the cin5-3 mutation, which disrupts the ACS5 gene [24], significantly reduces ethylene production in eto1-1 and partially suppresses its constitutive triple response [25]. Thus, we speculated that the constitutive triple response observed in CUL3A/B knockdown was mainly the consequence of ACS5 protein stabilisation. To address this issue, we first introgressed a transgenic line expressing a Dex-inducible myc-tagged ACS5 [25] into the cul3hyp double mutant background. Due to partial silencing of the ACS5 reporter construct in the cul3 hypomorph, we could not compare directly the myc-ACS5 protein accumulation in cul3hyp and wild-type backgrounds at identical concentrations of dexamethasone (Dex). However, by increasing Dex levels, we could normalize the expression of myc-ACS5 in cul3hyp and compare myc-tagged ACS5 protein half-lives in both genetic backgrounds (Figure 3B). After Dex-induction and subsequent removal, seedlings were incubated in presence of cycloheximide, which blocks de novo protein synthesis, and the myc-tagged ACS5 protein levels were then determined by immunoblot analysis. Whereas ACS5 protein in the wild type background had a very short half-life of 15 min as previously reported [25], there was no decrease in the level of ACS5 protein after 1 hour. Thus, Arabidopsis CUL3A and CUL3B are involved in the turnover of the ACS5 isoform. Furthermore, we produced the cin5-3 cul3hyp triple mutant and found that cin5-3 suppresses partially the triple response of cul3hyp (Figure 3C). Overall, we conclude that ACS5 is a primary target of CUL3A/B and ETO1 in seedlings, but other ACSs, in particular of the type-2 class, are most likely also degraded by this E3 ligase.. . . . CUL3A and CUL3B Regulate Primary Root Growth by a Mechanism Different from ETO1. . The cul3hyp mutant exhibits a shorter root (Figure 1F) and CUL3A/B genes are essential during embryogenesis for proper patterning of the hypophyseal lineage, important founders of the future root meristem [17]. Furthermore, the role of ethylene on primary root growth was recently emphasized by several reports [26]-[29]. To characterize the function of CUL3A/B during root development, the work focused on primary root growth.. At 11 days post-germination, the elongation of cul3hyp primary root showed a reduction of about 80% as compared to wild type (Figure 4A and Figure S2). The root growth defect was similar to ctr1. ein2-1 and ein3-1 (not shown) significantly suppressed this phenotype, but these mutations were unable to restore wild type root growth. Thus, CUL3A and CUL3B regulate primary root growth via both ethylene-dependent and independent mechanisms.. . 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000328.g004. Figure 4. . The cul3hyp mutant affects primary root meristem size and cell number.. A. Kinetic analysis of primary root elongation of wild type compared to the indicated genotypes. Values are average lengths of >16 roots. B. Cortical cell lengths in the differentiation zone of 7-day-old wild type and mutant roots. Values are average lengths (meansSD) of more than 60 cells measured in 5 different roots. C. Representative wild type and mutant root tips. Arrows indicate the transition zone where cells leave the meristem and enter the differentiation zone. D. Root-meristem size indicated in m and cell number of wild-type plants compare to the indicated genotypes. Cortex meristematic cells showing no sign of differentiation were counted. Values are average lengths or numbers (meansSD) of >12 roots at 7 dpg. T-tests were performed for each value compared to WT (the triple mutants were compared to their corresponding ethylene-insensitive mutants) indicating significant differences (p<0.05). The (*) symbol highlights values (meristem size/cell number) for which p>0.05. E. Mitotic activity in wild type and cul3hyp mutant root meristems, which is monitored by the proCYCB1;1-GUS reporter. Values in the right panel are average numbers of stained cells (meansSE) of more than 18 roots.. . . . To better characterise this phenotype, we measured the length of cells in the cortex in the differentiation zone, because it was found that ethylene stimulates auxin biosynthesis and its basipetal transport to the root elongation zone, where auxin inhibits cell elongation [27],[29]. Consistent with such a scenario, we observed a 50% reduction in length of these cells in eto1-1 (Figure 4B). However to our surprise, cortical cell length in the differentiation zone was only marginally affected in the cul3hyp mutant. This suggests that the mechanism by which ethylene inhibits root growth in a CUL3-deficient mutant background is different from that reported for eto1 mutants and ACC-treated wild-type plants [27],[29].. Root growth depends on cell elongation and on cell production rates in the root apical meristem. Therefore we investigated whether CUL3A/B knockdown affects the meristem size and/or activity. Strikingly, we observed that in cul3hyp the meristem size and cell number was reduced compared to wild-type plants (Figure 4C-D). Interestingly, in the ctr1-1 mutant, there was also a significant reduction in both meristem size and cell number. Conversely, in eto1-1, the root meristem size and cell number were even slightly increased in comparison to wild-type plants, suggesting that ethylene overproduction in this mutant can have opposite effects in the root, negatively affecting cell expansion in the elongation zone but positively affecting root meristem size.. Importantly, the meristem phenotype of cul3hyp was suppressed by the ein2-1 and ein3-1 mutations and therefore is dependent on ethylene signalling. We investigated whether this phenotype in cul3hyp was the consequence of reduced cell cycle activity. To this end we introduced the pCYCB1;1::GUS reporter construct [30] into cul3hyp mutant background. The Destruction box of plant B-type mitotic cyclins targets proteins for degradation after mitosis [31] and thus the pCYCB1;1::GUS reporter is a suitable marker to identify cells in G2-to-early M phase. The number of CycB;1:GUS expressing cells was not significantly reduced in the root apical meristem of cul3hyp compared to wild-type plants (Figure 4E). Thus, the most likely explanation of the ethylene-dependent inhibition of root growth is that cells in the cul3hyp mutant prematurely exit the meristem and make the transition to cell expansion.. . . The cul3hyp Mutation Affects Distal Root Patterning in an Ethylene-Independent Manner. To get more insights into the mechanism(s) by with CUL3A/B regulate root growth, we determined the expression pattern of both genes in Arabidopsis roots by using promoter-GUS fusions. After short GUS staining, we observed the strongest histochemical pCUL3A::GUS localization in the stele, but also in the distal part of the root (Figure 5A). A similar expression pattern was also observed for the pCUL3B::GUS reporter, although the signal was weaker in the stele. In the cul3hyp mutant, this region revealed clear defects of cell division patterns in the quiescent center (QC), other cells of the root stem cell niche and the columella root cap (Figure 5B-E). Starch granule staining, which marks only differentiated columella cells, showed premature differentiation of the columella root cap initials (Figure 5B). To investigate whether this defect in root meristem patterning is associated with mis-specification of the QC or columella cells, we examined the expression of different markers in the cul3hyp mutant background. In cul3hyp plants expressing QC-specific marker QC46 (Figure 5B) or endodermis and QC marker pSCR::H2BYFP (Figure 5C), we could identify signal in cells of the QC region, even when their morphology or cell number was altered. However, when we used columella-specific markers (Figure 5D-E) and in particular Q1630, which is only expressed in layers C1 and C2 in wild type (n=21), we observed a different pattern in the cul3hyp mutant plants. The marker was in general expressed in additional columella cell layers (50%, n=32) or showed a patchy distribution (22%, n=32).. . 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000328.g005. Figure 5. . The cul3hyp mutant shows defects in QC and columella cells organisation.. A. Expression patterns of pCUL3A::GUS and pCUL3B::GUS in primary roots. B. Double labelling of QC and columella cells in wild type and different mutants. The QC46 marker was used to visualize GUS staining (in blue) in the functional QC. Lugol staining was used to visualize the differentiated columella cells. C. Expression of the endodermis and QC marker pSCR::H2BYFP in wild type (left) and cul3hyp mutant (right) roots. D. and E. Columella-specific enhancer trap Q1630 and PET111 in wild type (left) and cul3hyp mutant (right) roots. Q1630 is only expressed in columella layers C1 and C2.. . . . It was recently reported that ethylene modulates cell division in the QC, which can eventually lead to additional columella cell layers [26]. Therefore we investigated whether the phenotype observed in cul3hyp is dependent on ethylene signalling. However, this was not the case as defects of cell division in the QC and columella remained in the ein3-1 cul3hyp triple mutant (Figure 5B). Moreover, contrarily to the report of Ortega-Martinez et al. [26], we did not observe deregulated QC cell divisions in the eto1-1 mutant. Thus, we conclude that the knockdown of CUL3A/B function in Arabidopsis disturbs distal root patterning by a mechanism that is ethylene independent.. . . PIN7 Protein Accumulates in cul3hyp Collumella Cells by a Post-Transcriptional Mechanism. Auxin is involved in distal pattern formation of Arabidopsis roots [32]. To investigate whether auxin signalling is affected in cul3hyp, we introduced the DR5rev-GFP reporter construct into the cul3hyp mutant and monitored GFP expression in the root tip (Figure 6A). The spatial distribution of DR5 expression in the mutant was more narrow and also reduced in intensity in comparison to wild type roots (Figure 6A), indicating that auxin signalling is reduced in the distal part of cul3hyp roots.. . 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000328.g006. Figure 6. . The cul3hyp mutant accumulates PIN7 in the root cap.. A. On the left panel, expression of the auxin-sensitive reporter DR5rev-GFP in wild type (left) and cul3hyp mutant (middle and right) roots. On the right panel, immuno-detection of GFP protein from wild-type and cul3hyp mutant root tips expressing the auxin-sensitive reporter DR5rev-GFP. The asterisk indicates an aspecific protein band used as loading control. B. PIN1 expression and polarity monitored by the pPIN1::PIN1-GFP reporter in wild type (left) and cul3hyp mutant (right) roots. C. PIN2 expression and polarity monitored by the pPIN2::PIN2-GFP reporter in wild type (left) and cul3hyp mutant (right) roots. D. PIN7 expression and polarity monitored by the pPIN7::PIN7-GFP reporter in wild type (left) and cul3hyp mutant (middle and right) roots. E. Ratio of the GFP signal between the stele and the columella tissues. F. Relative levels of PIN7 transcripts (determined by real-time RT-PCR) in 10 day-old root tips (1 cm of the root starting from the root tip) in cul3hyp and Col control plants. Data are meansSE.. . . . PIN-FORMED (PIN) proteins are rate-limiting factors catalysing polar auxin transport [33]-[34]. These proteins are crucial for auxin distribution and as such provide positional information to coordinate plant development. Because auxin signalling was reduced in the cul3hyp distal part of the root, one possibility is that the auxin gradient is disturbed in this mutant. Thus, we introduced into the cul3hyp mutant background different PIN::PIN-GFP reporters, consisting of their endogenous promoters and translational fusions between PIN1, PIN2 and PIN7 proteins and GFP. Whereas PIN1 and PIN2 expression patterns and levels were similar to wild type in cul3hyp (Figure 6B-C), we observed a higher expression level of PIN7 in columella cells (Figure 6D). The ratio of the GFP signal between the stele and the columella tissues was four-to-five times higher in cul3hyp roots in comparison to wild type (Figure 6E). PIN gene expression is regulated at the transcriptional, but also post-transcriptional levels [35]. Thus we performed quantitative RT-PCR assays on PIN7 gene expression on isolated wild type and cul3hyp root tips. In contrast to the PIN7 protein accumulation in columella cells, the PIN7 transcript level in cul3hyp was slightly reduced in comparison to wild type (Figure 7F). Our data indicate that CUL3A/B knockdown induces in the highest CUL3 expression domain PIN7 accumulation, most likely by a post-transcriptional mechanism.. . 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000328.g007. Figure 7. . Models for CUL3A/B action in ethylene biosynthesis and root growth.. A. Proposed model based on our genetic interactions to explain the role of CUL3A and CUL3B in ethylene biosynthesis. ETO1-dependent and independent effects on ethylene emission have been observed. (1) CUL3A/BETO1 controls ACS5 and most likely other type-2 ACSs protein stability. (2) ETO1 inhibits ACSs also independently of CUL3A/B [20]. The negative feedback mechanism from ethylene perception and signal transduction to ethylene biosynthesis is also shown. B. We propose a model in which the ethylene pathway acts at two different levels to inhibit primary root growth. The first mode of action triggered by ethylene is an inhibition of cell elongation as earlier reported [27],[29]. This mechanism most likely involves ETO1 and can be mimicked by exogenous application of ethylene. The second mechanism affects cell differentiation at the exit of the meristem and involves CUL3A/B..
