ResultsPositioning of silique pedicels of Arabidopsis was influenced by the 3-D clinorotationArabidopsis plants grew up to the flowering stage (corresponding to Arabidopsis growth stage number 6; Boyes et al., 2001) in the greenhouse. Afterwards the plants with two siliques grew for 5d under the normal gravity (1g) stationary control condition or the simulated microgravity condition on a 3-D clinostat. Under the 1g control condition, Arabidopsis siliques formed upward angles on the inflorescence (Fig. 1A). When Arabidopsis plants were exposed to the 3-D clinorotation, an altered architecture characterized by orthogonal or downward-oriented siliques was observed (Fig. 1B). The angles between the inflorescence stem and the pedicels of the clinorotated plants ranged from 40 to 100, with nearly 40% of siliques oriented approximately perpendicular to the inflorescence axis (90) (Fig. 2). In contrast, the stem-pedicel angles of the 1g control plants ranged from 10 to 80, and >70% of them possessed an angle of 20-40 under the 1g control condition (Fig. 2). These results indicate that the angle between the inflorescent stem and pedicels significantly increased under the 3-D clinorotated growth condition.Fig. 1.Phenotypes of Arabidopsis thaliana plants (A) grown under normal (1g) gravity conditions (control) and (B) after growth on a 3-D clinostat for 5days. Scale bars: 10mm. (This figure is available in colour at JXB online.)Fig. 2.Distribution of angles between Arabidopsis inflorescence stems and silique pedicels. Arabidopsis plants were grown either under normal gravity (1g) conditions (Control) or under the 3-D clinorotated conditions (3-D) for 5d. The angle between the orientation of the transition zone connecting the main inflorescence stem and the pedicel was read in a clockwise direction and called the pedicel angle (alpha). The pedicel angle with respect to the inflorescence axes upwards is 0 and downwards is 180. The data represent the mean of five replications, and each replication contains 50 siliques of four plants. Bars designate the SD.Developing seeds in the silique are essential for the pedicel response to the 3-D clinorotationSilique growth and development were characterized by observations of the branching sites of seedlings (Fig. 3). Figure 3A shows that the angles of pedicels from P4 to P14 were significantly increased by the 3-D clinorotation. This was not the case for the older silique pedicels (e.g. from P1 to P3) and for the most recently formed silique pedicels at the shoot apex (e.g. P15), neither type of which demonstrated a response to the 3-D clinorotation. To determine whether the ability of the silique responding to the clinorotation depended on the development of seeds in the silique, the correlation between the presence of developing seeds and the gravity response of the siliques was studied. As seen in Fig. 3C the siliques (e.g. P15) at the apex of the shoot in which the embryos had just started to develop (2 days after flowering; DAF) exhibited no response to the 3-D clinorotation treatment. However, as the embryos developed to the globular stage (Fig. 3D, E), the siliques (e.g. P14) became responsive to the altered gravity. The most pronounced response of siliques to the 3-D clinorotation (e.g. P5 and P6) was observed when the embryos reached the heart stage of development at 5 DAF (Fig. 3F). As the embryos in the siliques completed their development (Fig. 3G) after 6 DAF, the siliques (e.g. P1-3 siliques in Fig. 3A) lost the ability to respond to the altered gravity created by the 3-D clinostat.Fig. 3.The ability of Arabidopsis pedicels to respond to the 3-D clinorotation changed during the development of seeds in the siliques. (A) Phenotype of an inflorescence stem of an Arabidopsis plant grown under 3-D clinorotated conditions for 5d. To establish a baseline that facilitated identification of the response of pedicels to the altered gravity, the pedicels (P1 is the pedicel of the first formed silique, P2 is that of the second silique, P15 is that of the 15th silique) were marked according to the position of the siliques on the inflorescence stem. (B) Examples of siliques at different developmental stages. (C-G) Developmental stages of embryos in the siliques of B. Scales bars: 6mm in (A), 3mm in (B), 20mum in (C), 50mum in (D-F), 200mum in (G). (This figure is available in colour at JXB online.)To confirm further the influence of seed development on the response of siliques to the 3-D clinorotation, empty siliques (without seeds) were produced experimentally by removing anthers from the flowers before the pollen matured. In such plants, no difference between the angles of normal siliques (with developing seeds) and empty siliques was observed under the 1g control growth condition (Fig. 4C, D). However, on the 3-D clinostat, the angles of normal siliques increased (Fig. 4A, B) and the average angle was 70 (Fig. 4E), while the average angle of the empty siliques (Fig. 4B) was only 40 (Fig. 4E), which did not change significantly in comparison with those of both normal and empty siliques under the 1g control condition (Fig. 4D). These results indicate that the presence of developing seeds in the siliques is essential for the pedicel response to altered gravity.Fig. 4.Responses of pedicels with empty or normal siliques to the 3-D clinorotation growth condition. (A) Phenotype of pedicels of normal siliques with developing seeds subjected to 3-D clinorotation conditions for 5d. The growth directions of the pedicels with empty siliques (arrowheads) on the inflorescence stems of 3-D clinorotated (B) or the normal gravity (1g) grown plants (C). The distribution of pedicel angles of normal and empty siliques under the 1g control condition (D) and the 3-D clinorotation condition (E) is shown in the form of a histogram. The data of D and E were based on 150-200 pedicels of 20 plants from five biological repeats, and the angles of pedicels with empty and normal siliques were collected from the same plant. Scale bars: 6mm in (A-C). Bars in (D) and (E) indicate the SD.Effects of 3-D clinorotation on pedicel vascular patterning and branch point cell elongationThe vascular patterns of Arabidopsis pedicels exhibit dorsoventral asymmetry with respect to vascular positioning (Douglas and Riggs, 2005). To assess the influence of the 3-D clinorotation treatment on pedicel vascular patterning, serial transverse sections through the proximal regions of pedicels were made. Sections of pedicels of young siliques showed that the vasculature of pedicels consists of two lateral bundles and one abaxial bundle during early development (e.g. P15 in Fig. 3A, Supplementary Fig. S2A-C available at JXB online). Pedicels at this stage of development did not respond to 3-D clinorotation. The adaxial bundles arise during the middle phase of pedicel development (e.g. from P9 to P14 in Fig. 3A, Supplementary Fig. S2D, E, Fig. 5A, B), but the abaxial vascular bundles at this stage (e.g. P9 in Fig. 3A) were larger than the adaxial bundles in the 1g control samples (Fig. 5A, C). This difference between the abaxial and adaxial bundles disappeared in the 3-D clinorotated samples during the middle stage of pedicel development (Fig. 5B. D). The amount of vessel cells in the two lateral and the abaxial bundles was similar at the middle developmental stage and was not influenced by the 3-D clinorotation treatment, while the vessel cells in the adaxial bundle were significantly increased in the 3-D clinorotated samples in comparison with those in the control pedicels. The number of vessel cells in the adaxial bundles was only about one-fifth of that in the abaxial bundles in the controls, but the numbers of vessel cells in adaxial and abaxial bundles were almost the same in the 3-D clinorotated plants (Fig. 5E, F). These results suggested that the adaxial vascular bundle was more strongly influenced by the 3-D clinorotation compared with the other three bundles during the middle stage of pedicel development (e.g. P9-P14 in Fig. 3A).Fig. 5.Influence of the 3-D clinorotation treatment on the development of the pedicel vascular bundles. Fresh hand-cut transverse sections (A and B) and half thickness glutaradehyde-fixed sections (C and D) through the basal region of pedicels at 5days after flowering (e.g. P9 in Fig. 3A) were viewed using fluorescence and light microscope. Two lateral bundles (a left and a right bundle) and two middle bundles (an abaxial and an adaxial bundle) were observed in pedicels at this stage, but the adaxial bundle is obviously smaller than the abaxial bundle in the 1g control condition (A and C). The abaxial and adaxial bundle appeared the same size in the 3-D clinorotation condition (B and D). The ratios of the number of adaxial/abaxial (ad/ab) xylem vessel cells in the middle bundles (E) and left/right (L/R) xylem vessel cells in the lateral bundles (F) were calculated from the data based on 48 pedicels of 12 different plants from three repeats. ad, adaxial; ab, abaxial; L, left; R, right xylem vessel cells of vascular bundles. Scale bars: 50mum in (A-D). Bars in (E) and (F) are the SD, **P <0.01; ***P <0.001. (This figure is available in colour at JXB online.)Longitudinal sections through the node region of Arabidopsis plants grown on the 3-D clinostat and under 1g control conditions demonstrated that the overall patterns of the tissue types were similar (Fig. 6A, B). The cells in the adaxial region of the pedicel and main stem junction constitute the branch point site. As shown in Fig. 6C and D, the branch point cells become elongated under the 3-D clinorotation conditions compared with those in the 1g control plants (Fig. 6C, D; Supplementary Fig. S4 at JXB online). Interestingly, the SEM results showed that the epidermal cells at the abaxial pedicel-stem junction of the 3-D clinorotated plants were shorter than those of the control (Fig. 6E, F), but there was no statistical difference in the average size of epidermal cells in the pedicel tissues between the 3-D clinorotated plants and the control (Supplementary Fig. S4C). Thus it is assumed that the elongation of the branch point cells might be one of the primary reasons for the enlargement of the angle between the pedicel and the stem under the 3-D clinorotation condition.Fig. 6.Influence of 3-D clinorotation on the development of branch point cells. (A-D) Light micrographs of sections through the basal region of pedicel stem nodes of glutaraldehyde-fixed plants. (A) and (C) Longitudinal section of a control pedicel. (B) and (D) Longitudinal section of a pedicel of a clinorotated plant. Note the expansion of the branch point cells (bpc) of the 3-D clinorotated plants compared with the bpcs of the control plants. Scanning electron micrograph of the pedicel nodes of control (E) and 3-D clinorotated plants (F) showing the files of cells on the pedicel-stem junction surface (arrowheads point). Scale bars: 200mum in (A) and (B), 50mum in (C) and (D), 100mum in (E) and (F). (This figure is available in colour at JXB online.)Expression of KNAT1 in the node regionPrevious studies reported that a KNAT1 null mutant, brevipedicellus (bp), showed downward-oriented siliques (Douglas et al., 2002), which is similar to the morphology of wild-type plants grown on the clinostat in this study (Fig. 1B). KNAT1 is expressed in the node region at the base of the pedicels (e.g. the branch point region) of proKNAT1::GUS transformants. Such transformanats were used to study KNAT1 expression under 3-D clinorotated and 1g stationary control growth conditions. The GUS activity in branch point cells of the 3-D clinorotated samples (Fig. 7D-F) showed a drastic reduction compared with the control samples (Fig. 7A-C). Serial cross-sections through the node region showed that in the cortical tissues there was no difference in GUS expression between the 3-D rotated samples and the controls. In contrast, GUS activity decreased in the branch point cells of the 3-D clinorotated samples (Fig. 7K-N) compared with the controls (Fig. 7G-J).Fig. 7.Influence of 3-D clinorotation on the expression pattern of KNAT1 in the node region. Histochemical localization of GUS activity in proKNAT1::GUS Arabidopsis transformants grown under the 1g control (A-C and G-J) and 3-D clinorotated condition (D-F and K-N). C and F are detailed images of the boxed areas of A, B, D, and E, respectively. (G-J) Serial hand-cut cross-sections through the node region of a control inflorescence stem. (K-N) Serial hand-cut cross-sections through the node region of a 3-D clinostat-treated inflorescence stem. Scale bars: 6mm in (A) and (D), 400mum in (B) and (E), 50mum in (C) and (F), 200mum in (G-N). (This figure is available in colour at JXB online.)The relative transcript level of KNAT1 in the pedicel node region was determined using real-time PCR (Fig. 8A). This analysis demonstrates that the expression of KNAT1 in the node of the 3-D clinorotated plants was only about one-third of that of the control (Fig. 8A). The KNAT1-overexpressing plants, pro35S::KNAT1 transformants, were also rotated on the 3-D clinostat. The result showed that the pedicels of pro35S::KNAT1 plants were insensitive to the 3-D clinorotation (Fig. 8B, C) and consistent with the hypothesis that KNAT1 might be involved in the response of pedicels to 3-D clinorotation.Fig. 8.KNAT1 expression in the node region of the main inflorescence stems of both Arabidopsis wild-type (WT) and KNAT1-overexpressing (pro35S::KNAT1 transformants) plants grown under normal gravity (1g) or 3-D clinorotation conditions. The relative expression of KNAT1 in node regions of the WT (A) and the pro35S::KNAT1 transformant (B) inflorescence stems were detected using real-time PCR. (C) Distribution of pedicel angles of pro35S::KNAT1 transformants under both the 1g control and the 3-D clinorotated conditions. The pedicel angles were read as described in Fig. 2. Data were obtained from three repeats; each repeat contains 40 pedicels from four plants. Bars indicate the SD. ***P<0.001..
