ResultsTranscriptomic analysis of a GPA1 null mutant suggests a role for Galpha in JA-dependent gene expressionA role for the Galpha subunit and G-proteins in ABA signalling is well documented (Wang et al., 2001; Jones and Assmann, 2004; Pandey and Assmann, 2004; Pandey et al., 2006) and it was decided to test the effect of Galpha loss of function on the ABA-responsive transcriptome (http://affymetrix.arabidopsis.info/narrays/experimentpage.pl?experimentid=57). RNA samples were obtained from seedlings treated with or without 100muM ABA for 3h. Although 684 genes showed a >2-fold change in expression after ABA treatment in the wild type, >90% of these genes were also regulated >2-fold in gpa1-1. In addition, expression of genes including KIN1/2 and P5CS in response to ABA was indistinguishable between the wild type and gpa1-1 by northern blot analysis (data not shown). The lack of a significant effect of the gpa1-1 mutation on ABA-responsive gene expression in the analysis using whole seedlings may suggest that the role of Galpha in ABA-regulated gene expression is tissue specific (e.g. guard cells). Alternatively, as it has been reported that exogenously applied ABA leads to an increase in GPA1 protein detectable by immunoblot analysis (Pandey et al., 2006), it cannot be ruled out that Galpha is acting independently of changes in gene expression during the first 3h of response to ABA.To exploit further the data set generated, the differences in expression of genes in gpa1-1 compared with the wild type was examined in the non-ABA-treated seedlings. It was found that 134 genes were >1.5 times differentially expressed (67 down- and 67 up-regulated) in gpa1-1 compared with the wild-type control in this comparison (for a full list see Supplementary Table S1available at JXB online). Since plant G-proteins mediate the responses of several plant hormones (Fujisawa et al., 2001; Perfus-Barbeoch et al., 2004), it was examined whether these 134 genes were enriched in genes previously reported to be regulated by hormones. The Affymetrix transcriptomic data sets from the TAIR Microarray database (http://www.arabidopsis.org) were used for this analysis. By calculating how many of the genes from the list of 134 gpa1-1-affected genes were also regulated by each hormone, it was determined whether genes which respond to a particular hormone were more abundant in this list than would be expected by chance (Supplementary Table S2). Using this approach, it was observed that genes regulated by ABA and MeJA were most significantly enriched, by 2.7- and 2.8-fold, respectively. Binomial probability analyses indicated that this enrichment was particularly high for ABA- (probability of FALSE; 1.98E-06) and MeJA-regulated (1.45E-03) genes (Supplementary Table S2). Enrichment for genes regulated by ACC (a precursor of ethylene), brassinolide, GA, IAA, and zeatin was not significant. This comparative transcriptomic analysis of gpa1-1 and the the wild type consisted only of a single biological replicate. Nevertheless, it suggested a role for the Galpha subunit in the response of Arabidopsis to MeJA, and consequently further analyses were performed to investigate this.The Galpha subunit regulates MeJA-dependent chlorophyll reductionIn light of the preliminary transcriptomic data that were obtained, the physiological characteristics of Galpha mutants in response to MeJA were then investigated. It has been reported that JA and related compounds reduce chlorophyll content when applied exogenously to leaves (Parthier, 1990). Test were first carried out to determine whether Galpha mutants were impaired in JA-dependent chlorophyll reduction. Eleven-d-old seedlings were treated with 0muM or 50muM MeJA for 3d and the chlorophyll levels in cotyledons were measured. The ratio of total chlorophyll between MeJA-treated and non-treated cotyledons is shown in Fig. 1A and B. As described by Parthier (1990), MeJA-treated wild-type plants became significantly more yellow, particularly in the cotyledons, and the total chlorophyll was reduced to 33.5% and 19.8% of that of an untreated WS and Columbia ecotype control, respectively. However, gpa1 mutants retained >40% chlorophyll after MeJA treatment.Fig. 1.MeJA-dependent chlorophyll regulation is reduced in gpa1 mutants. Eleven-day-old plants grown on MS agar plates were treated with either MeJA (A and B) or DEX (C) for a further 3d. Top views of the seedlings treated with MeJA for 3d are shown in (A): WT ws, Wassilewskija wild type; VE, empty vector transgenic line; wGalpha, Galpha overexpressor plants; and in (B) Galpha mutants, gpa1-1, gpa1-2; and WT ws, Wassilewskija wild type. Cotyledons of the representative plants treated with DEX for 3d are also shown in (C) Galpha mutants, gpa1-3, gpa1-4; and WT col, Columbia wild type. Total chlorophyll was extracted from the cotyledons of these plants and the chlorophyll levels are shown as the ratio between treated and non-treated control plants. Bars represent 1 mm.Inducible (by DEX) ectopic expression of Galpha caused leaves to be paler due to a reduction in chlorophyll compared with control plants (Fig. 1C), while DEX treatment did not change the total chlorophyll content in wild-type or in empty vector transformant (VE) control plants. It was previously reported that overexpression of the Galpha subunit resulted in reduced expression of both CAB and RBCS (Okamoto et al., 2001). Whilst this finding cannot be formally attributed to MeJA responses specifically, as this effect occurs in the absence of exogenously applied MeJA, the current results strongly suggest that the Galpha subunit has a role in the regulation of chlorophyll levels in response to JA signalling.Galpha subunit regulates JA-dependent root growth inhibitionJA regulation of seedling and root growth (Lorenzo and Solano, 2005) is one of the most well examined phenotypes in Arabidopsis. In order to investigate further the role of Galpha in JA signalling, JA-dependent root growth inhibition was measured in gpa1 mutants and a range of JA concentrations that have been used for this assay was tested (Staswick et al., 1992). The results showed that gpa1 mutants are significantly insensitive to 1muM MeJA compared with the wild type (Fig. 2A, B). Staswick and colleagues demonstrated that at 1muM MeJA Columbia ecotype roots showed 50% growth inhibition (Staswick et al., 1992), which is consistent with the present assay (Fig. 2A). The difference in root length between the wild type and gpa1 mutants was statistically significant in all four alleles. It was then tested if overexpression of Galpha is also sufficient for the inhibition of root growth. The result showed that the root growth was >50% inhibited by Galpha overexpression (Fig. 2C). These data suggest that Galpha has a positive role in response of roots to JA.Fig. 2.MeJA-dependent root growth regulation is reduced in gpa1 mutants. Seedlings were grown on half-strength MS agar medium containing the indicated amount of MeJA for 11d and the root lengths were measured. (A) Mean root lengths of gpa1-3 and 1-4 as well as the WT (wild-type) Columbia ecotype and the coronatine-insensitive 1 (coi1-16) mutant that is insensitive to root growth inhibition by exogenous MeJA are shown. (B) Mean root length of gpa1-1 and 1-2 in the Wassilewskija (WS) background is shown with the WS wild type. (C) Inhibition of root growth by overexpression of Galpha is shown along with the WS wild-type control and the vector transformant control. The asterisk represents a significant difference in mean root length between the mutant line and the respective wild type (P<0.05) by Student's t-test for one-tailed assuming equal variance. Error bars represent the SD.The gpa1-1 mutant is impaired in JA-inducible gene expressionThe Affymetrix transcriptome data indicated that JA regulation of gene expression may be affected in gpa1 mutants. The regulation of one of the best characterized MeJA-inducible genes, VSP1, was therefore examined (although it was not on the Affymetrix arrays that was used). Ther results show that VSP1 was induced by MeJA in wild-type plants, with the highest accumulation detected 4-6h after MeJA application. Significantly, induction of VSP1 transcript was severely affected in the gpa1-1 mutant, with only very low levels of expression detectable (Fig. 3). It should be noted that the probe used for VSP1 has 90% sequence identity to VSP2 and it cannot be ruled out that the combined expression of both genes is being measured. However, VSP2 is less sensitive than VSP1 to JA induction and it is therefore believed that VSP1 expression is primarily being measured.Fig. 3.MeJA-inducible genes are misregulated in the gpa1 mutant. The MeJA induction time courses of JA-inducible genes were examined using 10-d-old wild-type (WT) and gpa1-1. The expression of MeJA-inducible genes, VSP1/2, PDF1.2b, and putative Thionin in gpa1-1 and the wild type after incubation with 50muM MeJA for the indicated time is shown. A 10mug aliquot of total RNA was loaded on each lane and beta-tubulin was used as a loading control.Although they are not solely regulated by JA, the basal expression levels of several PDF1.2 genes were found to be expressed relatively more strongly in gpa1-1 than in wild-type plants in the transcriptome data (Supplementary Table S2at JXB online). PDF1.2b gene expression was therefore examined in gpa1-1. PDF1.2b was induced by MeJA in wild-type plants, with expression peaking at 8h (Fig. 3), but MeJA-dependent PDF1.2b expression was detectable much earlier in gpa1.Similarly to PDF1.2b, expression of the putative Thionin gene (At1g66100) was found to be relatively low in gpa1 compared with the wild-type in the transcriptome data. Thionins are small cysteine-rich proteins with antimicrobial activity (Pelegrini and Franco, 2005) and are known to be induced by MeJA. The putative Thionin predicted amino acid sequence shows a sequence identity of 59% and 57% to Thi2.2 (At5g36910) and Thi2.1 (At1g72260) genes, respectively. In order to verify that gpa1-1 is impaired in MeJA induction of this putative Thionin, expression of this gene was also analysed by RNA blot analysis. The result indicated that the putative Thionin gene is inducible by MeJA in wild-type plants and that the expression peaks at 6h. However, Thionin gene expression was below the level of detection by northern analysis in the gpa1-1 mutant even 6h after MeJA application (Fig. 3). Together these data suggest that the loss of the Galpha subunit affects JA-responsive gene expression.The gpa1-1 mutant retains wild-type levels of JA and related precursorsOne possible explanation for the enrichment of JA-regulated genes among the gpa1-1-affected genes is that the gpa1-1 mutant might have altered levels of endogenous JA. In order to determine if this was the case, levels of endogenous free JA and the related precursors, OPDA and dinor-OPDA, were measured in 3-week-old rosette leaves of the wild type and gpa1-1. There were no significant differences in any of these JA-related compounds in wild-type and gpa1-1 plants (Fig. 4A). Although the data were obtained from adult leaf tissue and not seedlings, they demonstrate that the gpa1-1 mutant does not show gross effects on JA biosynthesis.Fig. 4.Galpha does not affect endogenous JA levels. (A) JA and its precursors OPDA and dinor-OPDA contents were measured using 3-week-old rosette leaves of WS wild type and gpa1-1. Three leaves were harvested from each plant and averages of 11 independent measurements are shown. Error bars represent the SDs. (B) The MeJA induction time course of a JA biosynthesis gene, AOS, was examined using 10-d-old wild-type (WT) and gpa1-1 treated with 50muM MeJA for the indicated times. The loading control is the same as in Fig. 3. (C) AOS gene expression was examined with or without MeJA and Galpha overexpression. Eleven-day-old seedlings were treated first with or without DEX for 3d and were incubated with or without 50muM MeJA for 6h. WT, Wassilewskija wild-type control and transgenic plants; VE, vector only transformant; wGalpha, transgenic plant inducibly overexpressing the Galpha subunit. beta-Tubulin was used as a loading control. (This figure is available in colour at JXB online.)The JA biosynthesis positive feedback pathway is intact in gpa1JA biosynthesis is autoregulated, and exogenous application of MeJA induces genes involved in JA biosynthesis such as AOS (Stenzel et al., 2003). In order to determine if the positive feedback mechanism of JA biosynthesis pathways was affected in Galpha mutants, AOS induction in response to exogenous application of MeJA was examined in wild-type and gpa1-1 mutant plants. As shown in Fig. 4B, MeJA induction of AOS is intact in the gpa1-1 mutant and is indistinguishable from that in the wild type.To confirm further that Galpha is not modulating the JA biosynthesis pathway, AOS expression in the transgenic line inducibly expressing the Galpha subunit (Okamoto et al., 2001) was analysed in the presence and absence of MeJA. AOS expression was not influenced by the overexpression of the Galpha subunit under either set of conditions (Fig. 4C), indicating that the gain of functional Galpha subunit does not have any effect on JA biosynthesis. These results indicated that the altered basal expression of JA-regulated genes in gpa1 mutants is most likely to have resulted from an alteration in the sensing of or response to JA.Expression of ERF1 and AtMYC2/JIN1/ZBF1 is not affected in gpa1PDF1.2 expression is positively regulated via the ethylene response factor 1, ERF1, overexpression of which is sufficient to increase PDF1.2 expression (Anderson et al., 2004). The exaggerated expression of PDF1.2 in gpa1 mutants could therefore have been due to overexpression of ERF1. Thus, the expression of ERF1 in gpa1 was investigated. The level of ERF1 hybridization signal on the gpa1-1 Affymetrix array was similar to that of the wild type. This was confirmed by northern analysis: the basal level of expression as well as MeJA induction of ERF1 in the gpa1-1 mutant was indistinguishable from that of the wild type (Supplementary Fig. S1 at JXB online). These data indicate that increased PDF1.2 expression in gpa1 mutants is therefore unlikely to be caused by misregulation of ERF1 transcription factor gene expression.Co-overexpression of AtMYC2/JIN1/ZBF1 suppresses the induction of PDF1.2 by ERF1, and AtMYC2/JIN1/ZBF1 has been suggested to act epistatically on ERF1 activation of PDF1.2 (Anderson et al., 2004). Conversely, mutations in AtMYC2/JIN1/ZBF1 result in increased expression of PDF1.2 (Lorenzo et al., 2004) and reduced expression of VSP1 (Berger et al., 1996), leading to the proposal that AtMYC2/JIN1/ZBF1 positively induces VSP1 while it negatively regulates PDF1.2. The expression of VSP1/2 and PDF1.2 in gpa1 is similar to that in the atmyc1/jin1 mutant and it was therefore possible that AtMYC2/JIN1/ZBF1 transcription factor gene expression may be reduced in gpa1. However, this was not the case and, as for ERF1, basal expression as well as MeJA-dependent induction of AtMYC2/JIN1/ZBF1 in the gpa1-1 mutant was indistinguishable from that of the wild type (Supplementary Fig. S1 at JXB online).Galpha overexpression affects transcription of VSP1/2 but does not affect that of AtMYC2/JIN1/ZBF1As described above, the gpa1-1 mutant and jin1 mutants lacking AtMYC2/JIN1/ZBF1 show very similar patterns of expression with respect to regulation of VSP1 and PDF1.2 genes. However, unlike jin1 mutants, expression of AtMYC2/JIN1/ZBF1 is indistinguishable from the wild type in gpa1-1. It is therefore possible that Galpha regulates VSP1/2 independently of AtMYC2/JIN1/ZBF1 gene expression. If this is the case, overexpression of the Galpha subunit should not affect AtMYC2/JIN1/ZBF1 gene expression but would still be sufficient for the expression of VSP1/2. Galpha-overexpressing plants accumulated a significantly increased level of VSP1/2 compared with the non-induced control in the absence of MeJA (Fig. 5A). These data show that Galpha overexpression is sufficient for induction of VSP1/2 expression. Significantly though, Galpha overexpression did not induce the accumulation of AtMYC2/JIN1/ZBF1 (Fig. 5A). It should also be noted that VSP1/2 accumulation was not detectable when the DEX-treated Galpha plants were kept in darkness (Fig. 5A), even when Galpha overexpression was induced to 3 times higher levels than in the light (Fig. 5C). This shows that overexpression of the Galpha subunit was sufficient to induce VSP1/2 expression in the light but not in darkness, and indicates that induction of VSP1/2 also requires an additional light input.Fig. 5.Galpha overexpression is sufficient for the induction of VSP1 and PDF1.2 genes. Eleven-day-old WS, wild-type control and transgenic plants; VE, vector only transformant; and wGalpha, transgenic plant inducibly overexpressing the Galpha subunit were treated with or without DEX under light and in complete darkness for 3d. A 10mug aliquot of total RNA was loaded on each lane and the same blot was probed with (A) AtMYC2/JIN1/ZBF1 and VSP1/2, (B) ERF1 and PDF1.2, and (C) GPA1 and beta-tubulin as a loading control.Galpha overexpression is sufficient for the transcription of PDF1.2 and ERF1In order to examine further the role of Galpha in the regulation of the PDF1.2 gene, the expression of PDF1.2 in Galpha-overexpressing plants was also tested. Figure 5B shows that Galpha overexpression increases PDF1.2 in the absence of MeJA. Significantly, Galpha-overexpressing plants also had higher accumulation of ERF1 compared with control plants. These data suggest that the accumulation of PDF1.2 transcripts in Galpha-overexpressing plants is likely to be the result of the accumulation of ERF1.In addition to this, as was seen for the VSP1/2 gene, PDF1.2 gene induction by Galpha overexpression was only detectable when the plants were incubated in the light. In the case of ERF1 gene expression, a moderate induction was consistently detected following Galpha overexpression in the absence of light; however, the induction of ERF1 was higher in the light than in the dark.Comparative transcriptome analysis of gpa1-4 and the wild typeThe preliminary microarray experiment using 22k Affymetrix arrays was performed with the wild type and the gpa1-1 mutant in the WS background. It should be noted that the Affymetrix 22k arrays are designed using the Columbia accession genome sequence. In order to gain further understanding of the global consequence of the loss of Galpha function on gene expression, the transcriptomes of 10-d-old wild-type Columbia ecotype and gpa1-4 mutant seedlings were investigated in a biologically replicated and quantitative microarray comparison. Briefly, seedlings of each biological replicate were treated with 0muM or 20muM MeJA for 6h. Operon Arabidopsis full genome microarrays were used to assess four biological replicates of each genotype. Each slide compared the transcriptomes of MeJA-treated and untreated seedlings of either the wild type or gpa1-4.A total of 822 genes were identified that were >2-fold regulated by MeJA in wild-type seedlings. This statistically significant (P-values <0.01) cohort of genes are shown in Supplementary Table S3 at JXB online. Some genes were detected several times due to multiplication of the probes. Of these 822 genes, 200 were <2-fold regulated in gpa1-4 (Cluster I; Fig. 6A). Of the remaining 622 genes, 527 genes were >2-fold changed in response to MeJA (P<0.01) in the gpa1-4 mutant. In addition, 43 genes in this group showed a change in response to MeJA that was more than twice that observed in the wild type (Cluster IIa and b; Fig. 6A, i.e. the direction of change was the same but was more exaggerated in the mutant. Taken together, 243 out of 822 genes (29%) regulated by MeJA in wild-type seedlings were differentially regulated in gpa1-4.Fig. 6.Loss-of-function Galpha has a significant impact on JA regulation of the transcriptome. (A) JA responsiveness in gpa1-4 was analysed in 822 genes that are >2-fold regulated by MeJA in the wild type. (B) Venn diagram showing the overlap of the 822 genes that were found to be up-regulated by JA in the custom arrays using 10-d-old seedlings, and the 760 MeJA-regulated genes in Affymetrix arrays using 7-d-old seedlings. (C) JA responsiveness in gpa1-4 was analysed in 247 genes that are commonly regulated by MeJA in the custom arrays and the publicly available Affymetrix arrays. The colour scale shows the fold regulation of the genes.The gene set (822 genes) was then compared with the gene set identified as >2-fold regulated by MeJA (760 genes) from Affymetrix array data available from the NASC [http://www.arabidopsis.org (ME00337)], in order to gain cross-platform validation of these observations. Although the biological materials, experimental conditions, and the microarray platforms differed, 247 genes were common to both experiments and data types. The probability of an overlap between randomly chosen sets of 822 genes and 760 genes on custom and 22k Affymetrix arrays, respectively, is <0.1%, meaning that no overlapping genes would be expected between randomly chosen gene sets of these sizes. Given that both arrays are biologically replicated and the differential expression of these genes by MeJA is statistically significant, the 30% overlap observed is meaningful.In this group of 247 genes (Supplementary Table S4 at JXB online), 31 genes were <2-fold regulated in gpa1-4 (Cluster I; Fig. 6C). Of the remaining 213 genes, 194 were also >2-fold regulated by MeJA (P<0.01) in gpa1-4. However, 17 genes (Cluster IIa and b; Fig. 6C) in this group of 194 genes showed a fold regulation that was twice that of the wild type. Together, these analyses show that the regulation of 48 out of 247 (19%) MeJA-regulated genes common to both arrays was misregulated in gpa1-4. These data therefore indicate that a loss of the Galpha subunit affects MeJA-regulated gene expression..
