ResultsFFT encodes a MATE proteinThe 488 amino acid protein (AtDTX35; estimated mol. wt, 53.2kDa) is classified as a MATE protein (see TAIR; www.arabidopsis.org/abrc/). The most similar proteins to FFT in BLAST searches are an anthocyanin permease in tomato (Mathews et al., 2003; 72% identity at the protein level), an unknown protein in grape (70% identity), a putative ripening-regulated protein in rice (DDTFR18, Os08g0562800; 61% identity), and four other Arabidopsis MATE proteins (48-67% identity; Supplementary Fig. S1 at JXB online). As expected, hydropathy plots (TMPred; www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/TMHMM-2.0/) predict 12 transmembrane spans for the protein encoded by At4g25640. There is no recognizable signal peptide to predict targeting of the translated protein (SignalP, PredoTar; urgi.versailles.inra.fr/predotar/predotar.html). Glutamate residues may be important for activity in MATE proteins, and one such, found in almost every eukaryotic and prokaryotic MATE protein's seventh transmembrane domain, is also seen in FFT (Supplementary Fig. S1). Site-directed mutagenesis of this amino acid in the human MATE1 protein severely affected expression and prevented uptake of tetraethylammonium substrate in human embryonic kidney-293 cells (Matsumoto et al., 2008). Consistent with a likely role in flavonoid metabolism, a search for cis regulatory elements (PLACE database; Higo et al., 1999) finds MYB recognition sequences upstream of At4g25640 including two MYB-binding sites commonly found in flavonoid pathway genes such as CHS (consensus MACCWAMC; Sablowski et al., 1994), situated at -99nt and -23nt relative to the start codon.FFT is most strongly expressed in floral tissues and guard cellsRT-PCR indicates that FFT is highly transcribed in floral organs and is present to some degree in most tissues, including young seedlings, senescent leaves and roots (Supplementary Fig. S2 at JXB online). To investigate further the spatial and temporal expression of FFT, a 1.4kb genomic fragment from immediately upstream of the coding regions was amplified and fused to the uidA reporter gene. Floral tissues of plants transformed with this construct again showed the strongest activity (Fig. 2). Notably, GUS expression directed by the FFT promoter was almost exclusively found in guard cells in aerial tissues, including the specialized guard cells of nectaries and the hydathodes of leaves. Anther, stigma and silique guard cells were strongly stained, whereas the activity in mature leaf guard cells was reduced compared with those of the inflorescence and of the cotyledon (Fig. 2b). In newly germinated seedlings, as well as strong staining in leaf guard cells, there was GUS activity in the roots (Fig. 2a). By day 4 post-stratification (ps), on 1/2MS plates (t=0 at transfer of plants to growth chamber), staining was found in two discrete areas of the roots, namely at the root apex (meristematic zone) and in the elongation zone through to the fully expanded cells of the differentiation zone. The transition zone showed little staining. GUS activity in the elongation-differentiation zone was strongest internal to the epidermis, apparently in the endodermis and cortex. The tips of lateral roots were also stained blue (Fig. 2a).Fig. 2.X-gluc staining of GUS-FFT-promoter-transformed plants (each row, left-right). (a) Seedling roots: day 4 post-stratification; day 7 root tip, elongation zone, and developing lateral root; day 12; day 17. (b) Aerial tissues: (row 1) cotyledon guard cells (GC); mature leaf hydathode GC; nectaries; (row 2) inflorescence apex; silique apex; close-up of papillae and stigma GC; (row 3) anther GC; developing seed in siliques; developing silique.Isolation of the fft-1 null mutantSeeds of two mutants with T-DNA insertions in the At4g25640 open reading frame (ORF) were obtained from the NASC. Both were segregated to homozygosity. The insertion in line N552331 was situated 200bp into the 3-untranslated region: this mutant (fft-2) was not null so was not studied further. Transcript was abolished in line N604224 (fft-1), in which the T-DNA was inserted into the third intron (Supplementary Fig. S3 at JXB online). Having established that only one T-DNA was present in this line (Supplementary Fig. S3), phenotypic analyses were conducted on the homozygous mutant fft-1.Several differences were observed between fft-1 and WT (Col0) plants in terms of growth and fertility. To ensure these phenotypic effects were the consequence of loss of function of FFT, genetic rescue was carried out, re-introducing a WT cDNA into the mutant line. The ectopic copy of the WT gene restored normal growth and fertility: root growth, seed and pollen development phenotypes were tested, and it was found that the FFT cDNA complemented all aspects of the mutation (Fig. 3-5; Supplementary Figs S4, S5 at JXB online).Fig. 3.(a) Germination of the fft-1 (- -) mutant versus Col0 (-). (b) Seed size in Col0 and the mutant. (c) Ruthenium red staining of imbibing seed mucilage. (d) Proportion of imbibing Col0, fft-1 and complemented fft-1 seeds showing complete mucilage when stained with ruthenium red. (This figure is available in colour at JXB online.)Fig. 4.Mutant fft-1 (- -) roots grow more quickly than Col0 (-) up to 2 weeks. (a) No sucrose: day 6-12, P=0.002-0.003 (n=70-81 for each time point). Inset: Col0 and fft-1 seedlings at day 4 post-stratification. (b) 1% sucrose: day 6-12, P <0.0001-0.001 (n=60-97 for each time point). (c) The fft-1 mutant complemented with 35S-At4g25640 returns to wild-type growth characteristics. (This figure is available in colour at JXB online.)Fig. 5.(a) Alexander's staining showing (left-right) lack of dehiscence, no pollen on the stigma, and reduced proportion of viable pollen in anthers in fft-1 (second row) versus Col0 (top row). Top right: pollen production and dehiscence in complemented fft-1. (b) Variable success of silique production in fft-1 versus Col0 and complemented fft-1.Germination and seed morphology is perturbed in fft-1Of plate-grown plants, >30% of the fft-1 mutant seeds [standard error of the mean (SE), 6%] had germinated by 29h ps whereas in the WT this was <14% (SE, 4%; t-test P = 0.01, 14 df; Fig. 3a]. Fewer mutant seeds in total, however, germinated successfully in the mutant by 99h [WT, 100% (SE, 2%); fft-1, 84% (SE, 6%)]. Because flavonoid mutants often show altered seedcoats and, because germination in fft-1 was variable, seeds were examined for physical abnormalities. The seedcoat of fft-1 was brown pigmented like that of the WT, but ruthenium red (RR) staining showed altered seed mucilage. RR stains acidic polysaccharides such as pectic polysaccharides: with imbibing Arabidopsis seeds, RR densely stains an inner layer of mucilage plus an outer, more diffuse (and easily disrupted) layer (Macquet et al., 2007). This staining of imbibing fft-1 seeds showed that the surrounding mucilage layer was absent or disrupted in the mutant. In the WT, 87% (SE, 3%) had complete mucilage compared with only 50% (SE, 4%) in the mutant (t-test, P <0.0001, 44 df; Fig. 3c, d). Seed mucilage contributes to seed dormancy and, thus, heterogeneous mucilage release in fft-1 mutant seeds is consistent with the abnormal germination rates. In addition, seed size was significantly more variable in the mutant (F-test, P <0.005), although mean seed size was not significantly different from that of the WT (Fig. 3b).FFT affects growth ratesIt was noticed that mutant seedlings appeared to grow and mature more quickly than the WT, so assays of root growth were carried out using plants on 1/2MS with and without sucrose (the former to promote anthocyanin production, in case of any effect). The mutant showed significantly faster root growth in all cases (Fig. 4a, b; for no sucrose: t-test, P <0.001 day 8, 64 df). Although the different germination characteristics meant that fewer fft-1 seeds were viable than WT seeds, the difference in mean rate of root growth developed after day 3-4 ps (when all viable seeds had successfully germinated) and continued to develop, suggesting that faster germination was not the primary cause of the root growth phenotype. The growth rate of fft-1 up to 2 weeks was greater under all conditions tested, including cold (4C) and higher intensity light (250mumol m-2 s-1).Fertility of fft-1 is reducedWhen examined using cryo-SEM, a proportion of mutant pollen appeared shrunken and irregular, and/or had an aberrant surface structure (Supplementary Fig. S6 at JXB online). To examine this further, Alexander's stain was used to differentiate viable from non-viable pollen. Acid fuchsin stains the protoplasm of viable pollen purple, and malachite green (MG) is a background counterstain. This can give an overestimate of viability, since non-viable pollen can contain protoplasm (Pline et al., 2002), but here a distinct difference between WT and fft-1 flowers was shown (Fig. 5a). Series of flowers at identical stages and positions on the primary inflorescence were sampled and stained. In contrast to WT anthers, which were plump, full of purple-stained pollen, and showed many pollen grains released upon dehiscence, the mutant anthers appeared thinner and had a lower proportion of (but did contain some) round, purple pollen grains. Much of the pollen in mutant anthers stained only blue-green, the cell walls coloured only by MG (Fig. 5a).Many fft-1 anthers fail to dehisce, with no visible pollen outside each (Fig. 5a, Supplementary Fig. S6 at JXB online). This was also obvious in epifluorescence microscopy. DPBA was used to enhance cytoplasmic flavonol fluorescence: it gives high emission levels when bound to flavonols rather than other flavonoids, for example fluorescing at 520nm and 543nm when bound to the flavonols kaempferol and quercitin, respectively (Saslowsky and Winkel-Shirley, 2001). WT flowers treated with DPBA showed bright yellow pollen: in contrast, only a few, non-fluorescent, pollen grains were present on mutant flowers (data not shown).Arabidopsis siliques elongate as seeds develop following successful fertilization: reduced silique length is a visible demonstration of diminished fertility. In the fft-1 mutant plants, silique length is very variable (Fig. 5b) and seed number per silique was lower than in the WT [WT mean, 51 (SE, 11); fft-1 mean, 25 (SE, 5); t-test P=0.0001, 19 df].Flavonoid metabolism is perturbed in mutant plantsIn fft-1 mutant seedlings up to 1 week of age, extracted anthocyanins were slightly reduced in level compared with the WT (not shown), but the pigment was visible even in young tissues and, in quantity, in mature fft-1 and WT plants grown on high (5% w/v) sucrose, which were comparable, dark purple, colours.Following epifluorescent imaging of the WT and fft-1, it was hypothesized that confocal microscopy would reveal differences in flavonoid content of the plants. Confocal laser scanning microscopy was therefore used essentially to perform fluorescence spectroscopy, and thus indicate any changes to flavonoid levels (a technique previously used by Hideg et al., 2002, and discussed in Pfndel et al., 2006). Since GUS staining had occurred strongly in floral guard cells, inflorescence tissues treated with DPBA were excited with UV light (364nm) and an emission spectrum was recorded (400-730nm). Spectra were recorded from anther guard cells in WT or mutant flowers (inset, Fig. 6a) from the same position on an inflorescence (the first open flower below the unopened bud cluster), in which flavonoids should be comparable. A peak of emission from anther guard cells expected to result from flavonoid excitation could be visualized at 500-580nm in WT tissues (Fig. 6b). Notably, a component of the fluorescence spectrum at 520nm was absent in fft-1 (Fig. 6b), coinciding with the expected peak from flavonol-DPBA secondary fluorescence (Saslowsky and Winkel-Shirley, 2001). To quantify and test statistically the difference in replicate flowers, the well-defined flavonoid fluorescence peak at 580nm and the peak from chlorophyll fluorescence were used to produce a ratio of flavonoid:chlorophyll emission. The ratios were significantly different between WT and fft-1, suggesting a lower flavonoid content in the mutant [WT, 1.60 (SE, 0.14) versus fft-1, 0.86 (SE, 0.05); t-test P=0.0016, 28 df; Fig. 6a]. Chlorophyll content was confirmed to be the same in WT and fft-1 mutant plants to make certain that levels of that pigment were not responsible for the differences observed, nor for any other aspect of the mutant phenotype (other photosynthetic parameters were also unaffected; see Supplementary Note S7 at JXB online). The products of the reactions of DPBA with flavonoids have not been comprehensively identified, however, so this can only be an indication of a difference in the flavonoid content in fft-1.Fig. 6.(a) Col0 versus fft-1 mean ratio of flavonoid (580nm) and chlorophyll fluorescence (690nm; Bolhar-Nordenkampf et al., 1989). Inset: example of the anther guard cell fluorescence scanned for analysis as viewed with the confocal microscope. (b) Examples of replicate fluorescence emission spectra from guard cells in Col0 and fft-1 anthers (background subtracted; normalized to 690nm). (This figure is available in colour at JXB online.)To investigate specific changes in flavonoid composition resulting from loss of the FFT-encoded protein, LC-MS was carried out on fft-1 mutant versus WT plants. A wide range of tissues was initially tested, guided by the position of GUS staining, to identify any differences between WT and fft-1 samples at the same stages of development. More plants were then grown so that the tissues where fft-1 apparently had different levels of particular metabolites could be sampled and analysed in replicate assays. Consistent differences were noted in plants from the separate sowings: in particular, mutant buds and siliques contained an altered spectrum of flavonol glycosides, with several peaks present at 40-70% the level in the WT, namely quercitin-rhamnoside-glucoside, kaempferol-glucoside-glucoside (kGG), and kaempferol-rhamnoside-glucoside. In contrast, there were almost doubled levels of quercitin-rhamnoside-glucoside-rhamnoside in buds (Table 1), and high levels of this flavonol were consistently found in mutant seedlings, suggesting that flavonoid synthesis and/or transport is perturbed in the fft-1 mutant. The difference in the levels of kGG was significant (t-test P=0.018, 5 df; see also Supplementary Fig. S8 at JXB online).Table 1.Relative level of flavonol glycosides in mutant versus wild-type (WT) floral tissues (further data in Supplementary Fig. S8 at JXB online)Peak and tissue typeMean content in fft-1 versus WT (%)kGG bud*40kRG bud70kRG immature silique73qRGR bud180qRG bud65qRG immature silique49*P=0.018, 5 df.q, quercitin; R, rhamnoside; G, glucoside; IS, immature silique; k, kaempferol..
