ResultsOrgan-specific mRNA accumulation of AOC gene family membersTo inspect putative redundancy among the AOCs in terms of mRNA accumulation, transcript accumulation of all four genes was first analysed by qRT-PCR analysis in various organs and developmental stages of A. thaliana plants. Using primers specific for individual AOC-cDNAs, accumulation of transcripts of each of the four AOC genes was analysed in juvenile, adult, and old rosette leaves, stems, cauline leaves, flower buds, and open flowers, all from 10-week-old plants (Fig. 1A, 1B). Obviously, AOC1 and AOC2 expression was high in all leaves, whereas AOC3 and AOC4 were preferentially expressed in roots (Fig. 1C). This corresponds to in silico data (www.genevestigator.ethz.ch, Fig. 1D) with the exception that the expression of AOC1 and AOC2 cannot be detected individually by the ATH1 micro array as it lacks AOC1- and AOC2-specific probe sets. The AOC1-labelled probe set is ambiguous and putatively also detects other AOC transcripts, for example, AOC2. The transcript accumulation of all AOC genes in stems, flower buds, and open flowers is relatively low (Fig. 1A, inset, Fig. 1B), but a preferential accumulation of AOC4 mRNA and, to a lesser extent, of AOC1 mRNA in flowers points to a putative function of these AOCs in JA biosynthesis during flower development.Fig. 1. Organ-specific expression analysis of AOC gene family members. Analyses were performed with different organs of 10-week-old plants grown under long-day conditions (A, B) or with roots of 10-d-old seedlings grown under continuous light (C). (A-C) qRT-PCR analyses of AOC1-4 expression. AtPP2A (At1g13330) served as a constitutively expressed control gene. Data represent mean values and standard errors of three biological replicates. The inset in (A) shows a magnification of the expression in stems, buds, and flowers. Microarray data (D) of AOC expression in wild-type organs were taken from the gene atlas (www.genevestigator.ethz.ch) (# indicates ambiguous probe for AOC1, which may detect partially other AOCs). CEL, comparative expression level.AOC promoter activities during seedling developmentIn order to elucidate tissue-specific expression of all four AOC genes and to confirm transcript data from various plant organs, promoter activities of AOC1, AOC2, AOC3, and AOC4 were analysed during growth and development. The promoter region covering the region 1.4-2.0kb upstream of the ATG and the first exon of each AOC gene was used to transform A. thaliana Col-0 plants with the respective promoter::GUS constructs (see Materials and methods for details). At least 10 independent T1 lines were used to select three representative lines each, which were further cultivated to generate homozygous lines. Homozygous T3 transgenic seeds were inspected prior to imbibition and 1, 2, and 3 d after germination (dag) (see Supplementary Fig. S1 at JXB online). Dry seeds were free of any AOC promoter activities, but AOC4 promoter activity was already detectable in the root tip at 1 dag, and increased during the following 2 d. Promoter activity of AOC1 appeared first at 2 dag in the cotyledons followed by AOC2 promoter activity at 3 dag, whereas initial AOC3 promoter activity was detectable in the hypocotyl and less in meristematic cells of the root tip at 3 dag. AOC4 promoter activity appeared strongly in meristematic cells of the root tip, in the root cap, and less in the hypocotyl of seedlings at 3 dag.In 1-week-old seedlings, most of the promoter activity patterns of seedlings at 3 dag were maintained, but at a higher level and were extended to the apical meristem in the case of AOC1 and AOC3 (Fig. 2). Highly localized promoter activities appeared for AOC3 and AOC4 in the root tip. The AOC3 promoter was active only in meristematic cells of the root tip, whereas AOC4 promoter activity was also visible in the root cap. Both promoters were active at the site of lateral root formation. In 2-week-old plants, strong promoter activities of AOC1 and AOC2 and weaker activity of the AOC3 promoter throughout all leaves was found, whereas the AOC4 promoter was highly active in the main vein of all leaves (Fig. 3A). Promoter activity patterns of AOC3 and AOC4 in the primary roots as well as the sites of lateral root out growth were largely consistent with those of 1-week-old plants, but intensities were stronger. In the case of AOC3, a shift of the localized promoter activity was observed in meristematic cells of 1-week-old primary roots (Fig. 2) into the elongation zone of 2-week-old primary roots (Fig. 3D), whereas AOC4 promoter activity was expanded to the central cylinder of the root elongation zone.Fig. 2. Promoter activities of AOC gene family members in 1-week-old seedlings of the respective GUS-reporter lines non-treated or treated with 10 M JAME (JM), and magnified views of primary root tips and lateral root tips. Bars represent 50 m.Fig. 3. Promoter activities of AOC gene family members in 2-week-old seedlings (A, D) and fully developed rosette leaves of 1-month-old plants (E, F) of the respective GUS-reporter lines. (A) Survey about the total seedlings from which magnifications (B), (C), and (D) were depicted. (B) Lateral root primordia. (C) Lateral roots. (D) Tip of primary root. (E) Top view and (F) cross-sections of rosette leaves. Bars represent 50 m (B-D) and 100 m (F).Promoter activities in fully developed plantsIn 1-month-old plants promoters of AOC1, AOC2, and AOC3 were active in rosette leaves throughout the leaf area with slightly higher activity in vascular tissue, whereas the AOC4 promoter activity was restricted to the major vein and first order minor veins, but did not appear in the veins where phloem loading takes place (Fig. 3E). Inspection of cross-sections confirmed this pattern and showed promoter activity for AOC1 and AOC2 in the epidermal layer as well (Fig. 3F). The specific AOC4 promoter activity in vascular bundles observed in the leaf overview was also confirmed by cross-sections (Fig. 3F). In roots, the following activity patterns appeared: the AOC4 promoter was preferentially active in the root tip of primary and secondary roots and in lateral root primordia, and the promoters of AOC3 and AOC4 were both active in the ramifications of primary and secondary roots (not shown). The promoter activity of the above-ground parts of 1-month-old plants persisted in 2-month-old plants, where AOC1, AOC2, and AOC3 promoters were active. The AOC4 promoter was also active in most cauline leaves and young leaves, but less active in senescent leaves and stems (see Supplementary Fig. S2 at JXB online).Promoter activities in flowers and during embryo and seed developmentYoung flower buds exhibited strong activity of the AOC1 promoter in sepals and petals, whereas very weak activity was observed for AOC2, AOC3, and AOC4 in sepals (data not shown). Open flowers exhibited high activity of AOC1 and AOC4 promoters in sepals, petals, the transmission tissue of the pistil and in filaments of stamens (Fig. 4A, 4C, 4D). For AOC2 and AOC3, only weak promoter activities were detected in sepals and for AOC3 in the stigma. Detailed inspection of mature pollen and anthers revealed high activity of the AOC1 promoter in anthers and released pollen, weak activity of the AOC4 promoter in some pollen grains, and no promoter activity of AOC2 and AOC3 in anthers and released pollen (Fig. 4D, 4E). The GUS activity detected for the AOC4 promoter in the flower stalk was confirmed by in situ hybridization with gene-specific probes (Fig. 4B). Expression of AOC1, AOC2, and AOC3 could not be detected by in situ hybridizations in the flower stalk, thus corresponding to the lack of GUS activity. The promoter activity data in general correspond well with the in silico expression data for (AOC1), AOC3, and AOC4 obtained from Genevestigator database (https://www.genevestigator.ethz.ch/;. Zimmermann et al., 2005).Fig. 4. Promoter activities of AOC gene family members in open flowers of two-month-old plants of the respective GUS-reporter lines. (A) Whole flower. (B) In situ hybridization with gene-specific probes in cross-sections of the flower stalk. (C) Stigma. (D) Anthers. (E) Pollen. Bars represent 50 m (B). Arrows in (A) indicate the region used for cross-sections shown in (B).Inspection of embryo development did not reveal promoter activity of any AOC gene family member in fertilized ovules or during various stages of embryo development (see Supplementary Fig. S3 at JXB online). These data correspond to undetectable AOC promoter activities in mature seeds in fully developed siliques (see Supplementary Figs. S3E and S1 at JXB online). Strong activities, however, of AOC3 and AOC4 promoters were detected in the valves and the abscission zones of siliques.Organ- and tissue-specific expression of the AOC gene family members upon JA treatmentSince AOC transcript accumulation in leaves has been shown to increase after JA treatment (Stenzel et al., 2003b), it was analysed whether JA treatment alters organ- and tissue-specific promoter activities of AOC1, AOC2, AOC3, and AOC4. The corresponding transgenic lines were grown for 7 d on agar plates and were kept untreated (control) or were treated with 50nM, 10 M, and 100 M JAME for 16h. Compared with the GUS activity of the non-treated plants, the general patterns of AOC promoter activities were not altered by any JAME concentration, but an elevated GUS activity could be seen for each line and each tissue as shown for 10 M JAME and the main root tip as well as the lateral root (Fig. 2). This increase in activity was also reflected in mRNA accumulation data published for total AOC mRNA and AOC1-AOC4 mRNA (Stenzel et al., 2003b. ). The only exception was an additional AOC4 promoter activity in the primary root stele near lateral root branching as well as in the elongating lateral roots. The induction of AOC gene expression by JAME was also confirmed by qRT-PCR analysis of the leaves and roots, respectively. In 10-d-old seedlings the expression of all four AOCs was increased by application of 10 M JAME (see Supplementary Fig. S4B, D at JXB online). Similar results were obtained in response to the local wounding of leaves or roots of the respective plant material (see Supplementary Fig. S4A, C at JXB online). The transcriptional induction was stronger in leaves with AOC1 and AOC2 being highly expressed. In roots, predominant expression of AOC3 and AOC4 was confirmed. However, the presence of an inducing stimulus, such as treatment with JAME and local wounding, also triggered the expression of AOC1 and AOC2 in roots which further corroborates the hypothesis of functional redundancies among the AOC gene family members. This suggests that promoter activities of the AOC gene family members are regulated mainly developmentally but can be increased by inducing signals such as JA.Loss-of-function mutants suggest functional redundancy of AOCs in JA biosynthesisT-DNA loss-of-function mutants with compromised expression of the respective AOCs (see Supplementary Fig. S5 at JXB online) were analysed to assess functional redundancy of Arabidopsis AOCs in planta. aoc1, aoc3, and aoc4 single mutants did not show phenotypic alterations in JA-related phenotypes such as root growth, lateral root development, flower development, and fertility (see Supplementary Table S3 at JXB online). In response to mechanical wounding, aoc1 and aoc4 single mutants showed slight yet significantly reduced OPDA levels 1.5h post wounding. However, the lack of an additive effect in the aoc1aoc4 double mutant delimits the biological significance of these results. Unfortunately, no AOC2 T-DNA-insertion line was available to study the effects of AOC2 loss in vivo and the tandem repeat organization of AOC1, AOC2, and AOC3 prevented the generation of higher order mutants that combine aoc1 and aoc3. The available double mutants aoc1aoc4 and aoc3aoc4 also lacked JA-related phenotypes. Remarkably, even tissues that showed a certain degree of specificity in the promoter::GUS analyses (e.g. AOC1 and AOC4 in anthers, Fig. 4) failed to show developmental defects associated with JA-deficiency (e.g. male sterility) in the respective double mutants (see Supplementary Table S3 at JXB online). In conclusion, these analyses indicate a generally high level of functional redundancy among the four Arabidopsis AOCs.Homo- and heteromerization of the four AOCs in vivo. Enzymatically active AOC2 is known to form a trimer in vitro (Hofmann et al., 2006). Therefore, heteromerization of the AOC proteins might be another level of regulation in JA biosynthesis since the spatial and temporal pattern of promoter activities of the four AOCs exhibited partially redundant properties.In order to inspect putative homomeric and heteromeric interactions of the different AOCs in vivo, BiFC analyses were performed using mesophyll protoplasts of A. thaliana transiently transformed with pairwise combinations of fusions of AOC1-4 with the N- or C-terminal half of YFP, respectively (Fig. 5). As visible by YFP fluorescence, all combinations of AOCs (homomeric as well as heteromeric) are able to reconstitute YFP, but with different appearance and intensities. As depicted for the combination AOC4-YFPN/AOC4-YFPC (Fig. 5A), strong fluorescence signals appeared as dots in chloroplasts indicating homomerization of AOC4. Other homomeric combinations showed a more diffuse signal within the chloroplasts, such as AOC3-YFPN/AOC3-YFPC. Analogous differences in the appearance of YFP fluorescence were also visible in heteromeric interactions. Although all of them showed fluorescence signals in chloroplasts, they appeared as dots (e.g. AOC4-YFPN/AOC1-YFPC) or partially diffuse signals (e.g. AOC3-YFPN/AOC1-YFPC). Using the calculation of relative fluorescence intensities, the homomeric interaction of AOC4 was highest compared with that of AOC1, AOC2, and AOC3 (Fig. 5B). The heteromeric interactions of AOC1, 2, and 3 were strongest with AOC4 independently of the type of combination, whereas combinations with AOC1 always exhibited the lowest intensities (Fig. 5B).Fig. 5. Summary on BiFC analysis of AOCs in mesophyll protoplasts of A. thaliana. AOC1, 2, 3, and 4 were fused with either the N-terminal or the C-terminal half of YFP and pairwise expressed in mesophyll protoplasts. (A) YFP fluorescence recorded by LSM using a lambda scan, (B) relative fluorescence intensities for all interactions shown in (A). Mean and standard deviations (n 30) is shown. Different letters designate statistically different values (one-way ANOVA with Tukeys HSD test; P 0.05). Bar represents 5 m for all micrographs in (A). Note that the level of red chlorophyll fluorescence depends on the presence of YFP due to the use of an excitation wave length of 514nm followed by a lambda scan.False-positive signals may occur in isolated protoplasts due to the protoplast isolation procedure and/or by the endogenously occurring AOC protein which is known to be abundant in fully developed leaves of A. thaliana (Stenzel et al., 2003b. ). Therefore, the data were verified by transient transformation of N. benthamiana leaves. The N. benthamiana AOC is encoded by a single gene, and the protein localization is confined to vascular bundles as shown in Supplementary Fig. S6 at JXB online. Thus, the use of N. benthamiana mesophyll protoplast circumvents putative artefacts caused by interactions of the heterologous expressed AOCs with an endogenous, untagged AOC. Data obtained using the N. benthamiana system verified the results recorded with mesophyll protoplasts of A. thaliana (see Supplementary Fig. S7 at JXB online)A final question is whether the heteromeric interaction among the AOC proteins affects AOC activity. Differential activities could result in different capacities of JA formation which, in turn, would result in differences in the expression of JA-responsive genes. Advantage was taken of the well-known positive feed-back loop in JA biosynthesis, where an increased JA level leads to an increase in AOC expression (Wasternack, 2007). Two pairs of AOCs exhibiting either weak (AOC1-YFPN/AOC2-YFPC) or strong (AOC3-YFPN/AOC4-YFPC) interaction in both transformation systems were selected and expressed in N. benthamiana leaves. In both cases, YFP fluorescence was clearly visible confirming an appropriate expression level of the transgenes. Transcript accumulation of the internal NbAOC was recorded by qRT-PCR as a read-out of wound-induced JA formation in the respective transgenic tissues (Fig. 6). Compared with the empty vector control, there was a clear increase in NbAOC transcript accumulation by the transient transformation of constructs expressing individual Arabidopsis AOCs. However, upon heterologous expression of the two selected interaction pairs, NbAOC transcript accumulation was not changed significantly when compared with the expression of the individual Arabidopsis AOCs. Moreover, no correlation was visible depending on the strength of heteromeric interaction. This suggests that heterologous over-expression of Arabidopsis AOCs in N. benthamiana can be attributed to elevated JA levels leading to increased NbAOC transcript accumulation. Heteromerization of two distinct AOC pairs apparently did not alter the capacity of JA formation on a broad scale, yet a putative in vivo function might be masked by the over-expression in the heterologous system.Fig. 6. Wound-induced transcript accumulation of NbAOC in leaves of Nicotiana benthamiana transiently transformed with various AOC constructs. AOC1, 2, 3, and 4 were fused with either the N-terminal or the C-terminal half of YFP and transiently expressed in leaves of N. benthamiana either alone or in two combinations (AOC1+AOC2 or AOC3+AOC4). Five days after infiltration, leaves were taken directly or wounded for 1h and the expression of the endogenous NbAOC was recorded by qRT-PCR using NtRPS6 as the constitutively expressed control. The mean of fold change SD (n=5) of wound-induced induction of NbAOC expression is shown. Different letters designate statistically different values (one-way ANOVA with Tukeys HSD test; P 0.05)..
