Results. . Isolation of a putative TcNPR3 gene. Initially, a partial TcNPR3 gene was identified by screening a BAC library by hybridization with a partial TcNPR1 sequence. Based on this sequence, PCR primers were used to amplify cDNA isolated from cacao genotype Scavina6 (SCA6) stage C leaves. A fragment of 1764bp was isolated, cloned into pGEM vector and sequenced to reveal an intact coding sequence of the expected length and with high homology to the Arabidopsis NPR3 gene.. Subsequently, a genomic sequence containing a putative TcNPR3 gene was identified by searching a cacao genome database (http://cocoagendb.cirad.fr/) [36] using the full-length cacao NPR3 cDNA as a query for the Blastn algorithm [38]. The structure of the TcNPR3 gene (Tc06t011480) was deduced by comparing the full-length cDNA and genomic sequences using SPIDEY software tool (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/spidey/index.html) [49], which revealed the presence of four exons and three introns, similar to the genomic structure of Arabidopsis NPR3 (Figure1A).. . Figure 1. . Gene and protein structure of Theobroma cacao NPR3. A. Diagram of the TcNPR3 gene structure. Boxes with diagonal stripes represent exons, slanted lines represent introns. The sizes of the entire genomic fragment and each intron are indicated. B. Alignment of the Arabidopsis NPR3 and predicted TcNPR3 proteins. Amino acids blocked in black indicate identical residues in both sequences and the amino acids below the blocks represent the consensus sequence. BTB/POZ and ankyrin repeat domains are highlighted by dashed lines and solid line boxes, respectively.. . . . . . Arabidopsis and cacao NPR3 protein sequences are highly similar. Conceptual translation of the TcNPR3 predicted transcript resulted in a putative protein sequence consisting of 587 amino acid residues, only one amino acid longer than Arabidopsis NPR3. Alignment of the TcNPR3 and AtNPR3 protein sequences demonstrated that they are highly similar to each other (60% identity and 77% similarity). Arabidopsis and cacao NPR3 share key structural features (Figure1B). Both proteins have a BTB/POZ domain near their N-terminus (dashed line box) that shares 64% identity and an ankyrin repeat region (solid line box) which shares about 72% identity. It has been shown that both BTB/POZ domain and ankyrin repeats are involved in protein-protein interactions [50-53]. These similarities in protein structure suggested that TcNPR3 gene may also share the same function as AtNPR3 in the regulation of the defense response.. . . Expression of TcNPR3 in cacao tissues. RT-Q-PCR was performed to investigate the expression level of TcNPR3 in various cacao tissues, including leaves from sequential developmental stages A, C, E, representing young, mid and mature stages of development. In addition, RNA was isolated from open flowers, un-opened flowers, roots, seeds and fruit exocarp. TcNPR3 is constitutively expressed at varying levels, in all tissues tested (Figure2), similar to the Arabidopsis NPR3 gene [23]. TcNPR3 basal expression levels were relatively low in seed and moderate in floral tissues and young and mid-development leaves (stage A and C). Its expression was high in roots, exocarps and mature leaves (stage E).. . Figure 2. . Gene expression analysis of TcNPR3 in various cacao tissues. Total RNA samples were collected from open flower, un-opened flower, root, seed, exocarp and three different leaf developmental stages from youngest to oldest (A, C and E) with three biological replicates for each tissue. RT-Q-PCR was performed usingTcTUB1as a cDNA loading and normalization control. Expression levels are presented as the meansstandard errors of three biological replicates.. . . . . . TcNPR3 complements the Arabidopsis npr3-3 mutation. Our earlier work has shown that the Arabidopsis npr3 mutant phenotype includes a enhanced level of floral disease resistance and significantly reduced whole plant fitness [23]. To explore the function of TcNPR3, we introduced the cacao NPR3 CDS under the control of a constitutive promoter into Arabidopsis npr3-3 mutant transgenic plants, and tested its ability to complement the npr3 mutant phenotype.. As compared to WT Arabidopsis, which is highly susceptible to Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato DC3000 (P.s.t.), floral infection resulting in shortened siliques and reduced seed production, the primary phenotype of Arabidopsis npr3-3 mutant is normal silique and seed development regardless of the inoculation of pathogen [23]. To test if TcNPR3 overexpression in the npr3-3 mutant can complement this phenotype, the floral infection assay was carried out with five individual TcNPR3 transgenic lines, Col-0 and npr3-3 mutant Arabidopsis plants. We inoculated young developing flowers with P.s.t and disease symptoms and bacterial growth were assayed. In water-treated inflorescences, we did not observe any phenotypic differences in any of the different lines (Figure3A). Seven days after inoculation, the P.s.t.-treated Col-0 plants were more susceptible than npr3-3 mutant plants, which showed impaired flower development and shorter siliques consistent with our previously reported results [23]. To evaluate the expression of the transgene, RT-PCR was performed using flowers of five independent transgenic lines along with wild-type Arabidopsis Col-0 and the npr3-3 mutant controls. As expected, TcNPR3 expression was not detected in either Col-0 or the npr3-3 mutant, but five independent transgenic lines all showed heterologous expression of TcNPR3 (Figure3C). All five individual transgenic lines exhibited intermediate levels of silique development after pathogen inoculation relative to Col-0 and npr3-3. To quantify these differences, the length of siliques of each infected inflorescence was measured in four biological replicates (Figure3B). The mean silique length of the npr3-3 mutant was 11mm regardless of the presence or absence of pathogen, but the silique length of infected Col-0 was significantly reduced to 1mm. All five independent transgenic npr3-3 lines overexpressing TcNPR3 exhibited intermediate silique lengths, ranging from 3mm to about 8mm. The inoculated silique length of line 1 is statistically the same as Col-0, but all the other lines are significantly longer than Col-0 but shorter than in npr3-3 mutant plants.. . Figure 3. . Functional complementation of the Arabidopsis npr3-3 mutation by TcNPR3. Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato DC3000 infection assay of transgenic npr3-3 mutant overexpressing TcNPR3. A. Representative images of siliques from infected Col-0, npr3-3 mutant and five independent lines of npr3-3 plants transformed with TcNPR3 seven days after inoculation with virulent bacteria Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato DC3000 (P.s.t.) (OD600=0.2 with 0.02% Silwet L-77) on top of the inflorescence. Additionally, water-treated (0.02% Silwet L-77) inflorescences of seven genotypes served as mock inoculation. Size bars are indicated in white (10mm). B. Average lengths of the fourth silique from the bottom of infected inflorescences seven days after inoculation (gray bars) compared to water mock inoculations (black bars). Bar chart represents meansSE of siliques from four biological replicates per treatment. Letters above the histogram indicate statistically significant differences among genotypes (P<0.05) determined by single factor ANOVA. C. Gene expression of TcNPR3 in transgenic Arabidopsis npr3-3 lines. RT-PCR was performed with cDNA prepared from flowers of 6-week-old plants of wild type (C), npr3-3 mutant (n) and five individual transgenic npr3-3 mutant overexpressing TcNPR3 (1-5). Arabidopsis ubiquitin (AtUbiquitin) was assayed as an internal and cDNA loading control.. . . . To further evaluate the effect of the TcNPR3 transgene in the complementation lines, we quantified bacterial titers in infected floral extracts. A decrease of bacterial colonization of about 60-fold was observed in the npr3-3 mutant as compared to Col-0 (Figure4). Although line 5 exhibited the same statistical level as npr3-3 mutant, two of the transgenic lines (Line 3 and 4) showed a level close to that of Col-0. The other two lines (line 1 and line 2) also supported significantly more bacteria than npr3-3 mutant though the level was not as high as in Col-0. In all, four out of five transgenic lines exhibited significantly higher bacteria levels than in npr3-3 mutant, again suggesting that TcNPR3 can at least partially complement npr3-3 mutant phenotype. The TcNPR3 protein only partially complemented the npr3 mutant, most likely because of the heterologous nature of the interactions between TcNPR3 and the Arabidopsis defense response machinery. It is also possible that TcNPR3 has functions that differ from those of AtNPR3. To gain further evidence to support these conclusions, we tested TcNPR3 function directly in T. cacao, using a transient expression system.. . Figure 4. . Functional complementation of the Arabidopsis npr3-3 mutation by TcNPR3. Bacterial populations of P.s.t. from infected flowers of Col-0, npr3-3 mutant and five individual transgenic lines. The whole inflorescences of six-week old plants (genotypes as indicated on x-axis) were inoculated with virulent P.s.t. DC3000 (OD600=0.2 with 0.02% Silwet L-77) and bacterial growth was determined by bacterial titers five days after inoculation. Data represent meansSE of four replicates, each containing two infected inflorescences from two individual plants. Letters above the histogram indicate the statistical differences among different genotypes (P<0.05) determined by Fishers PLSD analysis. cfu, colony forming units.. . . . . . Knockdown of TcNPR3 in cacao leaves results in enhanced disease resistance. Our expression data revealed that TcNPR3 is expressed at moderate to high levels in leaves depending on developmental stage (Figure2). To test the function of TcNPR3 in cacao leaves, we knocked down its expression in cacao leaves by expressing an artificial microRNA via Agro-infiltration. We predicted that if NPR3 functions as a repressor of the NPR1-dependent defense response in cacao leaves, reduced NPR3 transcript would result in increased pathogen resistance proportional to the NPR3 expression level. To test this hypothesis, a 21nt inverted repeat-hairpin construct was created based the design of Arabidopsis Mir319 [45] which was placed under control of an enhanced CaMV35S promoter. The artificial TcNPR3 microRNA construct was expressed in cacao leaves by Agrobacterium-mediated transient transformation via vacuum infiltration. Native NPR3 transcript levels were reduced up to 50% two days after transformation (Figure5A). To explore the effect of NPR3 expression on the ability of cacao leaves to respond and defend against pathogen infection, we inoculated the leaves with the cacao pathogen Phytophthora capsici. Three days after infection, lesions were formed in both control and NPR3-microRNA expressing leaf pieces (Figure5B). Average lesion sizes were significantly reduced to about one-half those on controls (Figure5C). To test the ability of pathogen to replicate on the leaves, we quantified the ratio of Phytophthora to cacao genomic DNA in the infection zones by RT-Q-PCR or specific target genes, which further demonstrated that the TcNPR3-mircoRNA transgene significantly reduced pathogenicity (Figure5D).. . Figure 5. . Pathogen bioassays of cacao leaves transiently transformed with a NPR3 microRNA. A. Relative expression of NPR3 in cacao leaves by RT-Q-PCR. RNA samples were collected two days after transformation by Agrobacterium vacuum infiltration. Genotypes are indicated on x-axis as: Ctrl: control vector. MiRNA-NPR3: micro RNA of cacao NPR3 derived from mir319a in Arabidopsis. B. Representative images of transformed leaves three days after inoculation with agar plugs containing Phytophthora capsici mycelium on the right and agar plugs with water on the left. Size bars are indicated in white (10mm). C. Average lesion sizes (meanSE of 12 lesion spots from four leaf discs). D. Relative virulence of P. capsici was measured by DNA RT-Q-PCR to calculate the ratio of pathogen actin to cacao actin three days after inoculation. Bars represent meanSE of four biological replicates each with three technical replicates. Asterisks show statistically significant difference to Ctrl determined by ANOVA..
