Results. . Isolation of the sag mutant. To find other novel regulators and to expand ABA signalling networks during seed germination and abiotic stresses, various T-DNA insertion mutants purchased from the ABRC were screened on half-strength MS medium containing 0.5 M ABA during seed germination. The mutant sensitive to ABA during seed germination is called sag. A sag mutant was produced by knocking out a MDN1 domain-containing protein (Fig. 1A, B, Supplementary Fig. S1). T-DNA was inserted after nucleotide 938 (Fig. 1A). This procedure may result in VWA domain deletion (Supplementary Fig. S1: asterisks for VWA domain and a arrowhead for T-DNA insertion site).. . Fig. 1.. . Characterization and ABA-responsive analysis of the T-DNA insertion mutant of sag plants. (A) T-DNA insertion site in sag; black boxes represent exons; white boxes represent introns; AAA and VWA represent the AAA and VWA domains in the putative peptide. (B) Reverse-transcription PCR analysis to confirm the knockout status of sag; upper panel shows AtSAG expression (35 cycles) in wild type (WT) and mutant line; lower panel shows EF1-alpha expression (25 cycles) as a control. (C and D) Seed germination records of WT and sag mutants treated with 0, 0.3, 0.5, 1.0, and 3.0 muM abscisic acid (ABA) at 2 and 5 d after stratification, respectively. (E and F) Cotyledon greening rates of the germinated seeds described in C and D with 0, 0.3, and 0.5 muM ABA at 3 and 6 d after stratification, respectively. Data are mean  SD of at least three replicates; at least 100 seeds per genotype were counted in each replicate.. . . . . . . sag seeds are hypersensitive to ABA during seed germination and seedling establishment. In the absence of ABA, no obvious differences were observed in germination rates between WT and sag seeds (Fig. 1C, D). At 0.3 and 0.5 M ABA, while the germination rates of WT seeds were 94 and 83% at 2 d of germination, respectively, the germination rates of sag seeds were 81 and 41%, respectively (Fig. 1C). At 1.0 and 3.0 M ABA, while the germination rates of WT seeds were 97 and 81% at 5 d of germination, respectively, the germination rates of sag seeds were 69 and 23%, respectively (Fig. 1D).. The early seedling growth of sag mutants was also slower than that of WT (Fig. 1E, F). A maximum of 100% green cotyledons were observed in both WT and sag seedlings after 3 d of germination in the absence of ABA. At 0.3 M ABA, 62% of WT but only 33% of sag mutants had green cotyledons after 3 d of germination. At 0.5 M ABA, 21% of WT but only a few sag seedlings had green cotyledons after 3 d of germination. After 6 d of germination, 32% of sag seedlings and 85% of WT seedlings had green cotyledons. These results indicated that sag mutants were hypersensitive to ABA during seed germination and seedling development.. . . Higher expression levels of AtSAG during germination were not induced by ABA in Arabidopsis. . To determine the expression pattern of AtSAG during germination in Arabidopsis, real-time RT-PCR was carried out. Fig. 2A shows that the expression levels of AtSAG were very high at 1-3 d of germination. As germination continued, the expression levels of AtSAG decreased. After 4 d of germination, the expression levels of AtSAG became much lower. The expression levels of AtSAG were not evidently changed by ABA. To further analyse the AtSAG expression pattern, GUS activity driven by native promoter of AtSAG was detected in pSAG:GUS transgenic plants. Strong GUS staining was observed in seeds germinated at 1, 2, and 3 d, but weak staining was observed in 4- to 7-d-old seedlings (Fig. 2C). ABA treatment did not change the GUS staining pattern during the investigated time points (Fig. 2C), although a ABA-responsive element (ABRE-like) was observed in the promoter region of AtSAG (data not shown). Real-time RT-PCR analysis revealed AtSAG expression in multiple organs of more mature plants (Fig. 2B). These results suggested that AtSAG was not induced by ABA during seed germination and may function in other developmental stages under specific conditions.. . Fig. 2.. . Expression pattern of AtSAG. (A) Relative expression of AtSAG during and after germination after the end of stratification in WT plants treated with 0 or 0.5 muM ABA. (B) Relative expression of AtSAG at differential tissues from the same growth stage in the WT plants. R, root; St, stem; RL, rosette leaf; CL, cauline leaf; F, flower; Si, silique. (C) GUS staining of the pAtASG::GUS transgenic germinating and germinated seedlings grown for 1-7 d on half-strength MS medium containing 1 or 0.5 muM ABA (this figure is available in colour at JXB online).. . . . . . Response of sag mutant to ABA defined a limited developmental period. Considering the ABA sensitivity of sag mutant seeds, the effect of ABA on seed germination and seedling development was investigated. When sag seeds were transferred to ABA-containing medium immediately after stratification without ABA, they also showed sensitivity to ABA compared with WT seeds (Fig. 3B). By contrast, the sag seeds showed less sensitivity than those directly stratified and germinated seeds on ABA-containing medium (Fig. 3A). When sag seeds were transferred to ABA-containing medium after 1 d of germination without ABA, they also showed sensitivity to ABA (Fig. 3C). However, when seeds were transferred to ABA-containing medium after 2 d of germination without ABA, no obvious difference was observed between WT and sag seedlings (Fig. 3D). The mutant displayed similar phenotypes in terms of morphology, growth, or development (data not shown). Therefore, AtSAG was involved in ABA responses in seed germination and early seedling development.. . Fig. 3.. . Response of sag plants to abscisic acid (ABA) defines a limited developmental period. (A) Wild-type (WT) and sag seedlings stratified and germinated on medium containing 0 or 1.0 muM ABA. (B) WT and sag seedlings transferred immediately to medium containing 0 or 1.0 muM ABA after stratification on control medium. (C) WT and sag seedlings transferred to the medium containing 0 or 1.0 muM ABA at 1 d of germination after stratification on control medium. (D) WT and sag seedlings that were transferred to the medium containing 0 or 1.0 muM ABA at 2 d of germination after stratification on control medium (this figure is available in colour at JXB online).. . . . To confirm the function of AtSAG in ABA responses, AtSAG-RNAi transgenic plants (RNAi) and AtSAG-overexpressing plants (OX) were generated. AtSAG expression in these lines was assessed by real-time RT-PCR (Fig. 4A). The AtSAG-OX lines showed decreased sensitivity to ABA, whereas the RNAi line showed less sensitivity to ABA than sag mutant (Fig. 4C), demonstrating that AtSAG functioned as a negative regulator in ABA response during seed germination and early seedling development.. . Fig. 4.. . Expression analysis and abscisic acid (ABA) responses of the RNAi and OX lines of AtSAG. (A) Real-time PCR analysis of one RNAi line and five independent OX lines of AtSAG; cDNA was obtained from total RNA of 10-d-old seedlings of each phenotype; gene expression was normalized to the WT expression level, which was assigned as a value of 1; standard errors are shown as bars above the columns. (B and C) Seed germination of WT, RNAi, and three OX lines during the time course with 0 and 3.0 muM ABA respectively. Data are mean  SD of at least three replicates; at least 100 seeds per genotype were counted in each replicate (this figure is available in colour at JXB online).. . . . . . AtSAG functioned upstream of ABI5 during germination and seedling development. ABI3, ABI5, and late embryogenesis genes were reactivated by ABA within a short development period. To determine whether ABI3 and ABI5 mediated this process, the expression of these genes and their target genes were detected in WT, OX2, and sag seeds germinated for 2 d with or without 0.5 M ABA by real-time RT-PCR. Fig. 5A-F shows that the expression of ABI3, ABI5, Em1, Em6, RD29A, and RAB18 were very low and showed no obvious differences among WT, OX2, and sag mutants after the seeds were germinated for 2 d without ABA. By contrast, the expression levels of the detected genes, in the presence of 0.5 M ABA, remarkably increased in sag mutants but decreased in OX2 lines. Western blot analysis also showed that ABI3 and ABI5 proteins accumulated at a higher extent in the presence of 0.5 M ABA in sag mutant seeds than in WT seeds (Supplementary Fig. S2). These results suggested that AtSAG may function upstream of ABI3 and ABI5 in ABA signalling during seed germination and seedling development.. . Fig. 5.. . Expression analysis of downstream genes in abscisic acid (ABA) signalling: relative expression of ABI3 (A), ABI5 (B), Em1 (C), Em6 (D), RD29A (E), and RAB18 (F) in the sag, WT, and OX2 seeds germinated for 2.5 d on medium containing 0 or 0.5 muM ABA.. . . . To determine whether AtSAG functioned upstream of ABI5, the sag/abi5 double mutant was generated. In general, the double mutant responded similarly to ABA to abi5 as if AtSAG functioned upstream of ABI5. As expected, the ABA response assays (Fig. 6B) indicated that the sag/abi5 double mutant was more insensitive to ABA than the sag mutant, but exhibited similar sensitivity to abi5 in the presence of 3 M ABA. These results suggested that AtSAG functioned upstream of ABI5 in ABA signalling.. . Fig. 6.. . Abscisic acid (ABA) responses of WT, sag, sag/abi5, and abi5 germinated seeds: germination rates on half-strength MS medium containing 0 (A) or 3.0 (B) muM ABA during the time course, respectively. Data show the mean  SD of at least three replicates; at least 100 seeds per genotype were counted in each replicate (this figure is available in colour at JXB online).. . . . . . AtSAG participated in the regulation of seed storage protein and oleosin genes during germination and seedling development. The expression of genes encoding seed storage proteins and oleosins are induced by ABI3 during seed development (Crowe et al., 2000; Lara et al., 2003). They may be induced in sag mutants. To illustrate this phenomenon, three genes encoding for oleosins and three genes encoding for seed storage proteins were selected for real-time RT-PCR. The expression of these selected genes showed no evident change in sag and WT plants without ABA treatment, but their expression was induced more in the sag mutants than in the WT after ABA treatment (Fig. 7). Unlike the induced expression of these genes by ABI3, the expression of these genes was induced in abi5 mutants. Expression of the selected genes was higher in the sag mutant than in the abi5 mutant (Fig. 7). These results demonstrated that the selected genes can be suppressed by AtSAG partially through ABI5.. . Fig. 7.. . Expression analysis of genes encoding for oleosin and seed storage proteins: relative expression of AtS1 (A), Ole2 (B), Ole3 (C), At3G22640 (D), At4G36700 (E), and At2S4 (F) in WT, sag, and abi5 seeds germinated for 2.5 d on half-strength MS medium with 0 or 0.5 muM abscisic acid (ABA).. . . . . . Salt and osmotic responses of sag and OX2 plants during seed germination and seedling development. Plants respond to abiotic stresses, such as drought, salt, and dehydration, and such responses are mediated by ABA signalling. To determine whether AtSAG was regulated in response to abiotic stresses, seeds of sag, OX2, and WT plants were sown on a medium containing 500mM mannitol or 200mM NaCl. Germination and green cotyledon rates were scored. The germination and green cotyledon rates of the OX2 lines were higher than those of WT seeds in medium supplemented with 500mM mannitol and the germination and green cotyledon rates of the sag mutants were much lower than those of WT seeds (Fig. 8A-C). The seed germination and green cotyledon rates of the sag mutant and the OX2 lines in medium supplemented with 200mM NaCl showed similar results to those in the mannitol-containing medium (Fig. 8D). These results suggested that AtSAG can regulate abiotic stresses during seed germination and seedling development.. . Fig. 8.. . Osmotic and salt responses of the sag and OX2 plants during seed germination. (A and B) Germination and cotyledon greening rates of the WT, sag, and OX2 plants with 500mM mannitol during the time course. Data show the mean  SD of at least three replicates; at least 100 seeds per genotype were counted in each replicate. (C and D) WT, sag and OX2 seedlings grown on half-strength MS medium containing 500mM mannitol or 200mM NaCl, respectively (this figure is available in colour at JXB online)..
