Results. . Cytoskeletal inhibitors differentially affect root growth in fh1 mutant and wild-type seedlings. Two Arabidopsis T-DNA mutant lines, fh1-1 and fh1-2, with corresponding wt controls were characterized. The T-DNA insertion interrupts the AtFH1 gene in the third exon in fh1-1 and in the 5 untranslated region (UTR; 27bp before start codon) in fh1-2 (Fig. 1A). In homozygous seedlings, AtFH1 mRNA was undetectable in fh1-1, while fh1-2 had a reduced transcript level (Fig. 1B).. . Fig. 1. . . The AtFH1 (At5g25500) locus and mutants. (A) AtFH1 protein domain structure (above); map of the AtFH1 gene and location of T-DNA insertions (below: open boxes, coding exons; filled boxes, non-coding exons; lines, introns and non-transcribed sequences). (B) AtFH1 transcripts in wt and homozygous mutant seedlings determined by semi-quantitative RT-PCR.. . . . Under standard growth conditions in soil or in vitro, fh1-1 and fh1-2 plants do not differ noticeably from the wt. The in vitro growth media were thus supplemented with anti-cytoskeletal drugs LatB and/or Oryz to enhance expected subtle cytoskeletal defects and uncover novel mutant phenotypes.. At 0.1 M concentration, the actin polymerization inhibitor LatB caused a more severe increase in root diameter and reduction in the longitudinal root growth rate in young seedlings of both mutant lines compared with the wt; the difference developed gradually within the first 48h on LatB (Fig. 2). Higher concentrations severely affected both genotypes, and the difference between the mutant and wt was no longer significant (Supplementary Fig. S1A, B available at JXB online).. . Fig. 2. . . Mutants lacking AtFH1 exhibit thicker, slower growing roots than the wt when treated with 0.1 M LatB. (A) Root diameter and (B) incremental root growth during 72h after transfer to LatB. Significant differences between any of the mutants and the wt in root diameter (t-test P < 0.0001) or root growth (t-test P < 0.05) are marked by asterisks. (C) Gradual decrease in root growth rates after 24, 48, and 72h on LatB. Significant differences between mutant and wt seedlings (t-test P < 0.0001) are marked by asterisks; data from the last 24h before transfer are shown for control.. . . . While the microtubule-depolymerizing drug Oryz also caused root thickening and reduced root growth, its effect was similar in both fh1 and wt seedlings. (Supplementary Fig. S1C, D at JXB online). However, simultaneous addition of 0.33 M LatB (i.e. a concentration that equally affected mutant and wt roots) increased the sensitivity of fh1 mutants to a low concentration of Oryz compared with the wt (Supplementary Fig. S1E).. Next, the inhibitor concentrations at which root diameter showed half the maximal increase (D50) and at which roots showed a 50% reduction in growth rate (L50) were estimated from dose-response curves of mutant and wt seedlings. Radial root expansion was always more sensitive to inhibitors than longitudinal growth. For LatB, both D50 and L50 were significantly lower in the fh1 mutants than in the wt (Table 1).. . Table 1. . . Effective doses of LatB and Oryz in mutants and the wild type.. . . . .  Treatment. . . D50. . . . L50. . . . . . . . . . . fh1-1. . . . Wt. . . . fh1-1. . . . Wt. . . Lat B. . . 10.1**. . . 28.3. . . 131.6**. . . 163.7. . . Oryz. . . 96*. . . 114.4. . . 233.1. . . 224.3. . . . . . D50, inhibitor concentration causing response half way between zero and the maximal observed diameter increase; L50, inhibitor concentration causing response half way between zero and the maximal observed growth reduction.. . . *Significant difference from the wt at P < 0.05; **significant difference from the wt at P < 0.001.. . . . Treatment with cytoskeleton-stabilizing drugs (jasplakinolide for actin or taxol for microtubules) resulted in reduced root growth and increased diameter in both fh1-1 mutant and wt seedlings. Both genotypes responded similarly, although longitudinal growth of mutant roots was significantly less affected by taxol (Supplementary Fig. S2 at JXB online).. . . Cytoskeletal inhibitors affect cell expansion and root hair development in mutants. Reduced longitudinal root growth can be due to impaired cell division or elongation, or both. To evaluate the contribution of cell elongation, the length of mature trichoblasts and atrichoblasts in inhibitor-treated roots was measured. LatB-grown fh1-1 and fh1-2 roots had shorter, wider cells, suggesting that the phenotype is at least partly due to more isodiametric cell growth (Fig. 3A, B; Supplementary Table S1 at JXB online).. . Fig. 3. . . Effects of LatB on rhizodermis and root hair development in fh1 mutant and wt seedlings. (A) Typical appearance of elongation zone rhizodermis in wt and mutants exposed to LatB. (B) Relationship between mature rhizodermis cell length and width in fh1-1 mutant and wt seedlings in control conditions and on 0.1 M LatB (each sample contains equal numbers of trichoblasts and atrichoblasts); compare Supplementary Table S1 at JXB online for fh1-2. (C) Abnormal root hairs found in mutant but not wt plants grown on 0.1 M LatB. (D) Percentage of abnormal root hairs in fh1-1 and wt plants grown in LatB- and Oryz-supplemented media. Significant differences (t-test P < 0.001) are marked by an asterisk.. . . . Mutant rhizodermis cells, especially trichoblasts, were often mis-shapen, exhibiting bulbous structures at root hair bases and/or branched root hairs (Fig. 3C). A significantly higher density of both total and abnormal root hairs was found in mutant, but not wt, seedlings grown on 0.1 M LatB compared with drug-free control, apparently due to shorter trichoblasts. At 0.33 M LatB, the total number of root hairs was reduced in both genotypes; mutants had more abnormal root hairs than the wt. A further increase in the LatB concentration completely inhibited root hair development. While fh1 mutants showed, on average, longer root hairs than the wt on control media or 0.1 M LatB or Oryz, their root hairs were shorter on 0.33 M LatB, suggesting increased sensitivity of tip growth to higher LatB doses. However, since root hair length varied substantially, the biological significance of this observation is questionable (Fig. 3D; Supplementary Table S1 at JXB online).. . . Actin and microtubule distribution in fh1 mutants. In the above experiments, both fh1 allelles behaved similarly, though fh1-1 had more pronounced phenotypes, in agreement with the residual gene expression in fh1-2. fh1-1 was thus chosen for introduction of in vivo fluorescent protein-tagged cytoskeletal markers (GFP-FABD for actin and GFP-MAP4 for microtubules) by crossing. Sister segregants carrying wt AtFH1 were used as controls.. The effects of the markers themselves on root growth in both fh1-1 and the wt were examined. GFP-MAP4 caused root thickening and reduction of root growth, and induced left-handed root twisting, as described previously (Granger and Cyr, 2001; Hashimoto, 2002); these effects were less pronounced in fh1-1mutants than in the wt. GFP-FABD did not show any significant effects in either fh1-1 or wt seedlings (Supplementary Fig. S3 at JXB online).. Given that this study was looking at root development, the focus here was on in vivo observations in rhizodermal cells. Thicker and more frequent actin bundles were usually observed in fh1 mutants than in wt seedlings. Low doses of LatB did not disrupt filaments but rather increased actin bundling, more obviously in mutants than in wt plants. LatB-treated wt plants thus somewhat resembled fh1 mutants grown under control conditions (Fig. 4A). Quantification of the microfilament patterns in the rhizodermis of seedlings growing on control media by estimating the skewness of fluorescence intensity distribution (correlated with the level of microfilament bundling) and pixel occupancy (giving insight into the overall density of actin cytoskeleton) showed that mutants have fewer but thicker microfilaments, consistent with increased actin bundling (Fig. 4B). The differences are even more obvious in profiles of individual bundle fluorescence intensity (Fig. 4C), confirming that fh1 mutants have fewer weakly labelled thin bundles or single filaments, and more bright thick bundles than wt plants.. . Fig. 4. . . Typical cytoskeleton organization in the rhizodermis of fh1-1 mutant and wt seedlings. (A) Actin labelled by GFP-FABD; arrows, actin filament bundles. (B) Actin filament bundling (skewness) and density (occupancy) under control conditions. (C) Frequency distribution of actin fluorescence peaks in four fluorescence intensity classes under control conditions. (D) Microtubules labelled by GFP-MAP4. (E) Microtubule density. Significant differences (t-test P < 0.001) are marked by an asterisk.. . . . Surprisingly, differences in microtubule organization between the wt and mutants were more pronounced than those in microfilaments. Even on control media, and more obviously in LatB-treated plants, mutants had fewer microtubules, shorter and less organized compared with the wt (Fig. 4D). Quantitative measurements of microtubule density revealed a significant reduction in LatB-treated fh1 mutants compared with the wt (Fig. 4E).. . . Effect of fh1 mutation on cytoskeletal dynamics monitored by VAEM. To compare individual microfilament and microtubule dynamics in rhizodermis cells of wt and fh1 mutant plants carrying GFP-FABD and GFP-MAP4, the VAEM technique was employed. Since preliminary experiments indicated that the three developmental zones of the root tip differ in cytoskeletal dynamics, the beginning of the differentiation zone was investigated, where both cytoskeletal systems behaved consistently very dynamically.. Differences in actin dynamics were observed between fh1 mutants and the wt (Fig. 5; Supplementary Video S1, S2 at JXB online). Mutant microfilament bundles were more abundant and less dynamic (in particular, they remained longer at pause) than those of wt seedlings, except a few rapidly moving bundles. This might reflect differences either in bundle size or in the degree of actin cross-linking.. . Fig. 5. . . GFP-FABD-tagged microfilament distribution and dynamics in the rhizodermis of fh1-1 and wt seedlings on standard medium. (A) VAEM images from two time points and their overlap showing growing or moving filaments in magenta, shrinking in green, and pausing and growing/shrinking in light green and light magenta, respectively. (B) Kymograph showing the static thick actin bundles in the mutant (arrows). (C) Distribution of actin bundle pause duration in mutant and wt.. . . . Differences between mutant and wt plants were also observed in microtubule dynamics (Fig. 6; Supplementary Video S3, S4 at JXB online). On the control medium, mutant microtubules exhibited increased dynamic instability compared with wt seedlings. LatB increased microtubule dynamics in both genotypes (Fig. 6A, B).. . Fig. 6. . . GFP-MAP4-tagged microtubule distribution and dynamics in fh1-1 mutant and wt rhizodermis. (A) VAEM images from two time points and their overlap showing growing microtubules in magenta, shrinking in green, pausing in light green, and growing/shrinking in light magenta. (B) Kymographs of microtubule dynamics under control conditions and on 0.1 M LatB-supplemented medium. (C) Distribution of microtubule phases on control and 0.1 M LatB-containing media. An asterisk indicates a significant difference between mutants and the wt (t-test P < 0.0001).. . . . To quantify microtubule turnover, the distribution of microtubule phases was determined in images taken during the time span of 2min. Mutants had fewer shrinking or pausing microtubules but more microtubules undergoing stochastic transition (i.e. alternatively shrinking and growing) than the wt (Fig. 6C). LatB reduced the fraction of growing microtubules in both genotypes, and increased the fraction of growing/shrinking microtubules even in the wt (again, LatB-treated wt plants resembled fh1 mutants grown under control conditions). Oryz in both genotypes increased the percentage of pausing microtubules and reduced the growing, shrinking, and growing/shirinking fractions. The distribution of microtubule growth and shrinkage rates differed somewhat between fh1 and wt roots (Supplementary Fig. S4 at JXB online). Despite comparable average growth rates, a higher proportion of microtubules in fh1 cells grew more slowly than average; this difference persisted upon LatB treatment, while Oryz reduced the growth rate in both the fh1 mutant and the wt.. . . Effects of the formin inhibitor SMIFH2 mimic the fh1 mutation. To verify that the observed mutant phenotypes are due to disrupted formin function, the effects of a recently described inhibitor of formin-mediated actin assembly, SMIFH2 (Rizvi et al., 2009), were examined in wt seedlings. In the standard experimental set-up, significant reduction of root growth was observed at or above a concentration of 20 M in both the wt and fh1 mutants (Fig. 7A). The effect of SMIFH2 was stronger when seedlings were exposed to the drug in the dark (possibly due to light sensitivity of the drug), and fh1-1 mutant roots were significantly more affected than those of the wt (Supplementary Fig. S5 at JXB online). SMIFH2-treated wt seedlings expressing GFP-FABD and GFP-MAP4 exhibited increased microfilament bundling and reduced microtubule density, especially after additional LatB treatment, again reminiscent of fh1 mutants (Fig. 7B).. . Fig. 7. . . Effects of SMIFH2 on longitudinal root growth and cytoskeletal organization. (A) Concentration-dependent growth inhibition; asterisks denote significant differences from non-treated seedlings of the same genotype (t-test P < 0.0001). (B) Rhizodermal microfilament and microtubule organization under control conditions and on 20 M SMIFH2-supplemented medium..
