Results. . In silico identification of HULK genes. To identify genes with homology to HUA2 in the Arabidopsis genome, we performed BLAST searches with HUA2 nucleotide and protein sequences, and identified three genes that, together with HUA2, form the HUA2-LIKE (or HULK) gene family. The HULK family members share a conserved domain structure that includes a PWWP domain (Pfam: PF00855; named after the conserved Pro-Trp-Trp-Pro motif), putative nuclear localization signal (NLS) motifs (ELM: TRG_NLS_MonoCore_2), an RPR domain (SMART: SM000582; regulation of nuclear pre-mRNA) and a PRR domain (proline-rich region) of variable length (Figures1a and S1). Among the HULKs, pairwise amino acid identities range from 50.7 to 86.3% and from 47 to 88.6% for the PWWP and RPR domains, respectively. HUA2 (AT5G23150) and HULK1 (AT5G08230) are distantly linked on chromosome5, while HULK2 (AT2G48160) and HULK3 (AT3G63070) are adjacent to the distal telomeres of chromosomes 2 and 3, respectively. Indicative of a comparatively recent gene family expansion, HUA2/HULK1 and HULK2/HULK3 are present within segmental duplications arising from the most recent paleopolyploidy event in the Arabidopsis lineage (Blanc etal., 2003).. . Figure 1. . Structure of HUA2-like proteins of Arabidopsis and maximum-likelihood phylogeny of HULK-like proteins in Embryophytes.(a) Diagram of HUA2-like proteins of Arabidopsis, showing the PWWP, RPR and PRR domains and NLS motifs with relative positions and sizes.(b) Unrooted phylogram of amino acid sequences in domains of HULK-like proteins of 28 Embryophyte species, with Physcomitrella patens as an outgroup, based on maximum likelihood. The scale bar indicates the number of amino acid substitutions per site. Support values are puzzle support values.(c) Intracellular localization of HULK proteins. Top: confocal images of N.benthamiana leaf epidermal cells expressing the pBIN-YFP-attR or mCherry-NLS controls. Bottom: localization of co-infiltrated mCherry-NLS and HUA2-GFP, HULK1-YFP, HULK2-YFP or HULK3-YFP constructs, with an overlay of the bright field (BF), GFP/YFP and RFP images. Scale bars=25mum.. . . . A broader search for proteins with a similar domain organization to that in the HULK proteins retrieved sequences from plants within the sub-kingdom Embryophyta, but not in green algae, animals or fungi. Phylogenetic analyses using the PWWP and RPR domains of HULK homologs from evolutionary distant species revealed two well-supported clades represented by HUA2/HULK1 and by HULK2/HULK3 (Figure1b, puzzle support of 0.98). The split is ancient, and probably occurred in the common ancestor of angiosperms. With the exception of Malus domestica, Brassica rapa and Populus trichocarpa, all species for which we identified more than one HULK homolog have members belonging to both the HUA2/HULK1 and HULK2/HULK3 clades (Figure S2).. The presence of putative NLS motifs in each of the HULK proteins indicates that they may localize in the nucleus. To assess the subcellular protein localization of HULK gene products, we transiently expressed and visualized GFP/YFP-tagged proteins in tobacco epidermal cells (Nicotiana benthamiana). All four HULK proteins localized to the nucleus (Figure1c), a finding consistent with the presence of NLS motifs in each family member (Figure1a). Thus, we have identified a family of HULK proteins with broad phylogenetic distribution in the Embryophyta that localize in the nucleus.. . . Expression of HULK gene family members. Based on both AtGenExpress (Schmid etal., 2005) and deep RNA-Seq read data from various tissues for 19 divergent accessions (see Experimental procedures and Gan etal., 2011), Arabidopsis HULK genes are expressed in all plant organs, as well as both vegetative and reproductive shoots (Figure S3). Although relative expression levels varied modestly by tissue, HULK2 and HULK3 were typically expressed more highly than HUA2, with HULK1 having the lowest expression. To further characterize spatial expression patterns of each HULK gene, we performed in situ hybridization of both vegetative and reproductive apices of Arabidopsis using gene-specific probes. Consistent with known vegetative and reproductive phenotypes, and previous work demonstrating broad HUA2 expression (Chen and Meyerowitz, 1999), we observed that HUA2 was expressed throughout young primordia and vegetative and reproductive apices (Figures2 and S4). Likewise, each of the HULK1-3 genes was expressed broadly in vegetative and reproductive apices in domains that are essentially indistinguishable from those for HUA2 (Figure2). Although in situ hybridization is only semi-quantitative, expression of HULK2 and HULK3 occurred earlier than that of HUA2 and HULK1, a finding that is consistent with the higher expression of HULK2 and HULK3 indicated by expression microarray and RNA-Seq data (Figure S3). Thus, HULK genes have overlapping expression patterns that, together with the commonality of the nuclear subcellular localization and high degree of sequence similarity of their corresponding gene products, suggest that they may act redundantly in performing their cellular functions.. . Figure 2. . HULK gene expression in vegetative shoot and inflorescence apices as detected by in situ hybridization. Longitudinal sections of vegetative shoot (a) and inflorescence apices (b) hybridized with antisense probes to the four HULK genes as indicated. All sections are from wild-type (Col-0) plants. The sections were stained for 5, 7, 4 and 3days, respectively, for HUA2, HULK1, HULK2 and HULK3 genes. Scale bar=100mum.. . . . . . Characterization of HULK loss-of-function alleles. The presence of coding sequence disruptions (hua2, hulk1 and hulk3 mutants; Figure S5), reduced expression observed using quantitative RT-PCR and RNA-Seq (all hulk alleles; Figures3, S5 and S6, and Tables S1 and S2), the recessive behavior of each allele in crosses (see below), and the similarity of phenotypes induced by T-DNAs versus amiRNAs (Figures S7 and S8) suggest that all the alleles included in our study are loss-of-function alleles; however, they may not all be null, and hulk2 is likely hypomorphic (Figures S5 and S6).. . Figure 3. . Genetic analysis of the quadruple hulk mutant, and phenotypes of single, double and triple hulk mutants.(a) Segregation analysis of hua2-7/+ hulk1 hulk2 hulk3 progeny genotyped without glufosinate selection (left) and with glufosinate selection (right). O and E indicate the observed and expected numbers of plants of a given genotype, respectively.(b) Single, double and triple hulk mutants grown under a long-day photoperiod. Scale bar=1cm. All photographs are at the same magnification. Arrowheads indicate inflorescences.(c) Effect of HULK genes on flowering time. Flowering time is shown as the total leaf numbersample standard deviation. The orange and blue bars indicate genotypes that flower earlier and later than Col-0, respectively (gray indicates no change). Asterisks indicate statistically significant differences in flowering time compared with Col-0 after correcting for multiple tests.(d, e) Expression levels of FLC (d) and HULK genes (e) in single and double mutants belonging to either the HUA2/HULK1 or HULK2/HULK3 clades. Values are meansstandard error for fold changes relative to Col-0 detected by quantitative RT-PCR (n=3). Different letters in (d) indicate HSD test groups at alpha=0.05.. . . . . . HULK genes affect flowering time and are essential for normal development. To assess the roles of HULK genes during development, we characterized plants homozygous for single, double or triple HULK mutations. Although we attempted to create a quadruple mutant, we were unsuccessful. Analysis of the progeny of selfed hua2-7/+ hulk1 hulk2 hulk3 plants that were selected for glufosinate resistance linked to the hua2-7 allele resulted in the exclusive retrieval of plants heterozygous for hua2-7 (Figure3a). Further, of 176 genotyped progeny of hua2-7/+ hulk1 hulk2 hulk3 self-pollinated plants, none were homozygous for the hua2-7 allele (Figure3a). This deviates significantly from the expected 1:2:1 ratio (chi2=135.045, P<0.0001), and +/+ hulk1 hulk2 hulk3 plants were actually over-represented. It remains to be determined whether the inactivation of all HULK family members precludes gamete formation, fertilization, or development of the zygote.. Although the gene family is essential for development, substantial functional redundancy among HULK genes was apparent (Figure3b). Single and double mutant combinations displayed normal or near-normal plant morphology, with pronounced defects in shoot size and morphology apparent only in some triple mutants. We have previously shown that hua2-7 mutants flower earlier than wild-type, as measured by the reduced number of rosette leaves initiated during vegetative development prior to the transition to flowering (Wang etal., 2007). To further assess the role of HULK1-3 in the regulation of flowering time, we recorded the leaf number at flowering of wild-type and single, double and most triple mutants (Figure3c); the developmental abnormalities of hua2-7 hulk2 hulk3 mutant plants and their frequent lethality prior to reaching the reproductive stage prevented analysis of the flowering time in this genotype. anova demonstrated a significant effect on flowering time for each HULK gene as a factor (P<4.310-6). We also found that the interaction term was highly significant (P<10-15), indicating that the effect of the HULK genes on flowering time was non-additive (i.e. epistasis was apparent). Overall, the presence of hua2-7 was sufficient to accelerate flowering in any mutant combination that was assessed for flowering time.. To examine the effects in specific contrasts, we performed pairwise comparisons among all genotypes included in our anova analysis. After adjusting P values using the Tukey-Kramer method to control for experiment-wide multiple testing, we found that eight genotypes differed significantly from wild-type in terms of flowering time (P<10-7 in all cases; indicated by asterisks in Figure3c). All single, double and triple mutant combinations that lacked HUA2 function flowered earlier by approximately five leaves. Although single mutants in HULK1-3 did not differ significantly from wild-type in terms of flowering time in pairwise tests, two mutant combinations with wild-type HUA2 activity, but lacking HULK2 and HULK3 function (hulk2 hulk3 and hulk1 hulk2 hulk3), flowered later than wild-type by approximately five leaves.. Previous studies established that HUA2 is required for maintaining expression of the floral repressor FLC (Poduska etal., 2003; Doyle etal., 2005; Wang etal., 2007). To examine whether HULK genes affect FLC expression, we determined FLC transcript levels in hua2/hulk1 and hulk2/hulk3 single and double mutants by quantitative RT-PCR. As shown in Figure3(d), FLC transcript levels correlated with the number of rosette leaves produced. For example, FLC levels were reduced in hua2-7 and hua2-7 hulk1 plants, but were increased in the hulk2 hulk3 mutant. These data suggest that HULK genes have antagonistic effects on the regulation of flowering. To exclude the possibility that potential compensatory regulation among HULK genes may account for the antagonistic effects on flowering time and FLC expression, we determined the transcript levels for each HULK gene in single and clade-specific double mutant backgrounds. As shown in Figure3(e), mutation in any one of the HULK genes has no effect on expression of wild-type alleles of the remainder of the family members, indicating that HUA2 and HULK2/HULK3 act independently as a repressor or accelerators of flowering, respectively. However, the hua2-7 allele is epistatic to other hulk alleles in terms of regulation of flowering time. The action of these loci is consistent with modulation of the expression of FLC (the flowering time master repressor). However, their mechanism(s) of action is (are) presently unknown.. . . Unique and overlapping functions of individual HULK genes. Analysis of multiple hulk mutants revealed a complexity of unique and overlapping gene functions, which largely reflected the phylogenetic relationship of the HULK genes. Most developmental functions were redundantly performed by the two members within each clade, but overlapping functions across clades are indicated by further enhancement of certain traits in some triple mutants and the lethality of the quadruple mutant.. . . Disruption of the HUA2/HULK1 clade. Although there were no obvious changes in basic plant growth in hua2-7 hulk1 plants, there were sporadic alterations in flower phyllotaxy (Figure4a) that were not seen in single hua2-7 or hulk1 mutants, but were previously reported in hen2 hua2 plants (Western etal., 2002). Further, early flowers in hua2-7 hulk1 plants were sterile, observed as undeveloped siliques due to asynchronous growth between stamens and pistils (Figure4a,b). When siliques with seed were produced, the seeds in hua2-7 hulk1 plants, but not in hua2-7 and hulk1 single mutants, had disrupted development (Figure4c). For siliques collected from the middle of the inflorescence, the embryos of approximately 67% of seeds (n=185) showed developmental arrest at various stages relative to normally developing seed within the same silique and the corresponding wild-type (Figures4c and S7). A similar wide range of seed developmental arrest has been described previously for several mutants in genes required for normal seed development, such as oma-1, fey-1 and ila-1 (Johnston etal., 2007). In the case of hua2-7 hulk1, the defective embryo phenotype progressively diminished during reproductive development, such that siliques toward the top of the inflorescence appear normal. The embryo defects seen in hua2-7 hulk1 plants were enhanced by loss of HULK2 function. In hua2-7 hulk1 hulk2 triple mutant plants, the defective embryo phenotype had high penetrance, and the plants uniformly showed earlier stages of seed arrest compared with phenotypes observed in hua2-7 hulk1 plants. In siliques collected from the middle of the inflorescence, all seeds were translucent, with embryos that were arrested in early development, in contrast to normal seed development in hulk2 and hulk1 hulk2 plants (Figure4c). Inspection of the translucent seeds of both hua2-7 hulk1 and hua2-7 hulk1 hulk2 plants showed that embryos arrested in the globular to early heart stage of development (Figure4d). Individual embryo cells were of normal shape and had a normal cell-wall thickness, and incipient tissue layers and seedling organs were established in the expected locations. Instead, defects in mutant embryos appear to comprise heterogeneous and random changes in cell numbers in various parts of the embryo. In the context of characterized embryo-lethal mutants (Johnston etal., 2007; Meinke etal., 2008), such defects suggest that HULKs may affect cell proliferation either through its regulation or by providing a limiting metabolic compound.. . Figure 4. . Morphological characterization of single, double and compound triple mutants lacking hua2-7 and/or hulk1 activities.(a) Adult Col-0 wild-type and hua2-7 hulk1 plants. The arrowhead indicates a hua2-7 hulk1 inflorescence with two undeveloped siliques at the stem node.(b) Col-0 wild-type and hua2-7 hulk1 flowers. The stamens (arrowhead) are shorter than the stigma in mutant plants.(c) Col-0 and mutant siliques collected from the middle of the inflorescence.(d) Nomarski images of Col-0 embryos at the early globular, triangular and mid-heart stages (i, ii and iii, respectively), and arrested embryos in double mutant hua2-7 hulk1 embryos (iv and v) and triple mutant hua2-7 hulk1 hulk2 embryos (vi-x). Note the normal cell shape, even in very sensitive epidermal cells, and normal tissue layers and organ initiation in mutant embryos. Mutants may show variant cell numbers in diverse parts of the embryo (arrowheads).(e) Col-0 and mutant stamens stained with the Alexander stain. Viable pollen stains deep pink, while hua2-7 hulk1 hulk3 pollen stains green/blue, indicating lack of viability. Scale bars=1cm (a), 1mm (b), 20mum (d) and 50mum (e).. . . . Although HULK2 and HULK3 share a high degree of protein sequence similarity, loss of HULK3 function in the sensitized hua2-7 hulk1 background resulted in a different phenotype relative to hua2-7 hulk1 hulk2. Triple mutant hua2-7 hulk1 hulk3 plants were reduced in size with small leaves and only a few branches (Figure3b); additionally, these plants were entirely sterile due to pollen inviability (green/blue coloration as observed with the Alexander stain, see Figure4e), and triple mutant plants had to be derived from heterozygotes at the HUA2 locus (i.e. hua2-7/+ hulk1 hulk3 plants). Single mutant plants (hua2-1, hulk1 and hulk3) and the double mutants hua2-7 hulk1 and hua2-7 hulk3 all showed normal pollen viability (Figure5e). Thus, HUA2 and HULK1 act redundantly to affect shoot phyllotaxy, stamen outgrowth in early flowers and embryo development. HULK2 acts redundantly with HUA2 and HULK1 in embryo development, while HULK3 function is required for pollen development in the hua2-7 hulk1 mutant background.. . Figure 5. . Morphological characterization of the hua2-7 hulk2 hulk3 triple mutant.(a) Morphology of 9-day-old wild-type Col-0 and mutant seedlings. The arrowhead indicates roots with arrested development in the hua2-7 hulk2 hulk3 mutant.(b) Longitudinal sections of 9-day-old wild-type Col-0 and hua2-7 hulk2 hulk3 seedlings showing shoot meristem abnormalities in the mutant.(c) Scanning electron micrographs of Col-0 and hua2-7 hulk2 hulk3 flowers.(d) Scanning electron micrographs of stamens of wild-type Col-0 and hua2-7 hulk2 hulk3.(e) Scanning electron micrographs of Col-0 petal cells and hua2-7 hulk2 hulk3 petaloid stamen cells. Scale bars=20mum (b), 150mum (c), 100mum (d) and 50mum (e).. . . . . . Disruption of the HULK2/HULK3 clade. Loss of function of the HULK2/HULK3 clade in hulk2 hulk3 mutant plants resulted in normally developing but late-flowering plants (Figure3). Further loss of HULK1 function in this sensitized background had no visible effect on plant development, and hulk1 hulk2 hulk3 mutant plants recapitulated the late-flowering phenotype seen in hulk2 hulk3 mutants (Figure3c). By contrast, the effect of loss of HUA2 function in the hulk2 hulk3 background was dramatic (Figure5). Triple hua2-7 hulk2 hulk3 seedlings were smaller than wild-type and had aberrant root development (Figure5a). Few triple mutants survived on soil, and those that survived were stunted and often failed to induce reproductive development and bolt (Figure3b). As assessed by serial longitudinal sections of the vegetative meristem, hua2-7 hulk2 hulk3 mutants had a flattened shoot apical meristem with an abnormal and reduced rib zone, as opposed to the wild-type shoot apical meristem with a high central dome on top of an expanded rib zone comprising well-defined large, round and lightly stained cells (Figure5b). In addition, mutants displayed randomly initiated and mis-shapen leaf primordia that developed into shoots with abnormal phyllotaxis and abnormal leaf shapes (Figure3b). When reproductive development was initiated in hua2-7 hulk2 hulk3 plants, the reproductive tissues were abnormal, as assessed by scanning electron microscopy (Figure5c-e). Petals in early flowers were often absent and stamens were aberrant, showing sterility, failure to dehisce, and occasionally a petaloid morphology. Later flowers showed more defined stamen structures, although neither early nor late flowers produced fertile stamens. In early flowers, the gynoecium was mis-shapen with disorganized stigmatic hairs (Figure5c). Cross-pollination of flowers with wild-type pollen did not result in fertile siliques, suggesting aberrant pollen tube germination or guidance, development of defective female gametophytes, or development of defective integuments. Although there was a spectrum of severity in flower defects, none of the flowers displayed completely normal morphology, and this mutant line was maintained as a hua2-7 hulk2 hulk3/+ stock. Thus, HUA2 and HULK1 have different effects in the hulk2 hulk3 mutant background: while the function of HULK1 seems dispensable, HUA2 function is required redundantly with HULK2 and HULK3 for establishment of normal plant morphology.. . . Expression profiling of HULK mutants. To further investigate the roles of HULK genes, we performed transcriptome profiling using Illumina RNA-Seq with biological replication for seedlings of Col-0, hua2-7 single mutants, hua2-7 hulk1 double mutants and hua2-7 hulk1 hulk2 triple mutants grown at 20C under long-day conditions (16h light). To compare gene expression, we selected seedlings at similar developmental stages (emergence of the 4th true leaf) and used whole aerial shoot tissue for RNA preparation. For the triple mutant, only a subset of progeny were collected owing to reduced germination and developmental asynchrony, an inherent experimental limitation that potentially biased the resultant triple mutant transcriptome profiles toward wild-type. By aligning resulting RNA-Seq reads to the Arabidopsis genome, we calculated normalized expression levels for all genes in the latest annotation (TAIR10, http://www.arabidopsis.org/). On average, we aligned 3.5million 78bp reads per replicate (Table S1). In every case, the Pearson R2 value for coding gene expression levels between biological replicates exceeded 0.99 (Figure S9). On average, approximately 17400 genes per genotype were found to be expressed (five or more reads mapped), a finding similar to that reported in an experimentally comparable study that used seedlings of wild accessions (Table S2) (Gan etal., 2011).. We identified genes with differential expression compared to wild-type (Col-0) using the DESeq package (Anders and Huber, 2010), and detected 106, 822 and 317 genes in the single, double and triple mutants, respectively, at a false discovery rate of 0.05 (see Experimental Procedures). Among these, genes with reduced expression relative to wild-type were observed more often (Fisher's exact test, P<0.05 in each comparison). However, the majority of differently expressed genes had low fold changes, and only 53/106, 235/822 and 124/317 differentially expressed genes were more than twofold up- or down-regulated in the single, double and triple mutants, respectively (Table S3). Although most differentially expressed genes showed only modest fold changes, FLC was either the most strongly down-regulated gene, or one of the most strongly down-regulated genes, in the single, double and triple mutants (Figure6 and Tables S2 and S3). Thus, compared to all genes, the extent to which FLC is down-regulated in mutant combinations lacking hua2 function is exceptional, and is associated with the uniformly early-flowering phenotype in the various mutants (Figure3). In addition to FLC, several other genes with known roles in flowering time regulation displayed decreased expression levels, such as MAF1 in double and triple mutants, and TEM1 and TEM2 in single, double and triple mutants (Table S2).. . Figure 6. . Analysis of differential gene expression in mutant combinations. Histograms of fold changes for genes differentially expressed between Col-0 and the hua2-7 single mutant (a), the hua2-7 hulk1 double mutant (b), and the hua2-7 hulk1 hulk2 triple mutant (c). For each comparison, the number (n) of differentially expressed genes is shown (false discovery rate of 5%). In all cases, HULK genes and FLC are indicated if they were detected as differentially expressed in a given comparison. To facilitate display, red lines show smoothed densities.. . . . Gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis of differentially expressed genes showed an over-representation of genes associated with responses to biotic and abiotic stimuli, and reproductive and post-embryonic development, as well as transcription factor or DNA- binding activities. Table S4 provides a complete list of enriched GO terms and associated genes; the top 20 GO functional categories in each mutant showed a strong overlap (Figure S10). The diversity of GO categories may reflect the pleiotropic nature of the double and triple hulk mutant combinations. Further, loss-of-function phenotypes associated with the differentially expressed genes (Lloyd and Meinke, 2012) may contribute to the defects in phyllotaxy (IBM1) and the reduced growth (EXO, MLS, IBM1, MAF1 and FLC), fertility (DRL1, IBM1 and TKPR1) and seed viability (SPK1) observed in compound hulk mutants. In addition, differentially expressed genes were enriched for transcription factors belonging to the AP2/ERF superfamily (Table S5). The effect of the HULK proteins on AP2/ERF superfamily expression and the similarity of AP2/ERF developmental functions to those of the HULK proteins, i.e. flower, embryo and root development, meristem determinacy and epidermal cell identity, as well as the response to abiotic and biotic stimuli, suggests these two gene families may have a functional association (Elliott etal., 1996; Moose and Sisco, 1996; Chuck etal., 1998; Liu etal., 1998; Boutilier etal., 2002; Gu etal., 2002; Hirota etal., 2007).. The RNA-Seq data revealed that hulk genes included in respective mutant combinations were down-regulated, an expected finding given the characterized T-DNA disruptions (Figures5 and S4). However, we found no evidence to suggest compensatory up-regulation of unaffected (non-mutant) HULK transcripts as an explanation for our finding of functional redundancy among family members, i.e. HULK1-3 were not up-regulated in the hua2-7 single mutant, and HULK3 was not up-regulated in the hua2-7 hulk1 hulk2 triple mutant (Figure6)..
