Results. . AUX1/LAX genes show dynamic expression patterns during early leaf development. Previous analyses have reported that AUX1, LAX1 and LAX2 are expressed in the shoot apex, whereas LAX3 is not expressed in aerial tissue (Bainbridge etal., 2008). To provide a more detailed analysis of these expression patterns, we used transgenic Arabidopsis Col-0 plants expressing promoter-GUS constructs to document the temporal and spatial pattern of AUX1/LAX gene expression throughout leaf development. Focusing first on LAX1 expression (Figure1a,e,i), the GUS reporter signal was initially apparent in a group of cells at the tip of the leaf. As development proceeded, points of LAX1 expression were observed along the flanks of the leaf in an approximately symmetrical pattern just proximal to the mid-point of the proximal/distal axis, indicating the tips of the presumptive serration outgrowth (Figure1e). At later stages, new points of LAX1 expression appeared along the leaf margin proximal to the original sites of LAX1 expression, again indicating presumptive sites of serration (Figure1i). In addition to expression at points along the margin, signal was also often (but not always) observed towards the base of the leaf in internal positions. With respect to LAX2 expression (Figure2b,f,j), GUS activity was initially restricted to internal tissue towards the distal region of the primordium in a complex pattern. As the leaf developed, the network of cells expressing the LAX2 reporter shifted towards the base of the leaf, with the lower boundary of expression being approximately at a line defined by the most proximal points of LAX1 expression (Figure1f). LAX2 expression was always excluded from the outer cell layers, and gradually became restricted to a network resembling part of the differentiating vascular system (Figure1j). LAX3 expression was not detectable in leaf tissue (Bainbridge etal., 2008). AUX1 expression has previously been reported to be restricted to the meristem epidermis and margin of the emerging leaf primordia (Reinhardt etal., 2003; Heisler and Jonsson, 2006), and our analysis of an AUX1 promoter reporter gene construct broadly confirmed this expression pattern throughout the stages of leaf development (Figure1c,g,k). At the earliest stages of development, some reporter gene expression was observed in the sub-marginal cells, but we cannot exclude the possibility of some signal diffusion in these small samples. The synthetic DR5 promoter construct has been widely used as a reporter of auxin signaling (Ulmasov etal., 1997; Sabatini etal., 1999), and analysis of plants transformed with a DR5::GUS construct indicated that, at an early stage of development, signal was apparent at the leaf tip and two equidistant points on the margin, as well as in internal strands in the distal region (Figure1d) (Mattsson etal., 2003). At later stages of development, ProDR5:GUS signal became apparent both at points along the leaf margin, indicative of presumptive outgrowth, and in a network within the leaf reminiscent of regions of presumptive vascular differentiation (Figure1h,l) (Scarpella etal., 2006; Wenzel etal., 2007).. . Figure 1. . . AUX1/LAX genes show dynamic patterns of expression during early leaf development.. Expression patterns observed in ProLAX. 1:GUS (a,e,i), ProLAX. 2:GUS (b,f,j), ProAUX. 1:GUS (c,g,k) and ProDR. 5:GUS (d,h,l) transgenic lines. Patterns are shown for leaf5, which was removed at an early stage of development before overt initiation of serration (a-d), at a stage when the first serration is initiated (e-h), and at a later stage when the first serration is clearly formed (i-l). The GUS signal is blue. Scale bars=50mum (a-d), 100mum (e-h) and 200mum (i-l).. . . . . Figure 2. . Mutation of three auxin importers is required for altered serration growth.. (a-i) Silhouettes of exemplar leaf 5 at an early stage of leaf development when serration is just initiating in WT primordia (a-c), at a mid-stage of development when the first serration has clearly formed in WT (d-f), and at a late stage of development when multiple serrations have formed (g-i). Leaf shapes are shown for WT (a,d,g), aux1/lax1/lax2 (b,e,h) and quadruple (quad) mutant plants (c,f,i). Scale bars=50mum (a-c), 200mum (d-f) and 500mum (g-i).. (j,k) Quantitative analysis of compactness (j) and bending energy (k) are shown for early-, mid- and late-stage leaves dissected from WT and aux1/lax1/lax2 plants. ANOVA using a Kruskal-Wallis test indicated that the samples were statistically significantly different for both parameters at P<0.01 (compactness) and P<0.05 (bending energy) (n=6). Subsequent pairwise Mann-Whitney non-parametric tests for each developmental stage indicated that mid- and late-stage aux1/lax1/lax2 samples were statistically significantly different for compactness compared with their WT counterparts at P<0.05 (indicated by an asterisk), and late-stage aux1/lax1/lax2 samples were statistically significantly different for bending energy compared with their WT counterpart at P<0.05 (indicated by an asterisk).. . . . . . Combined loss of three auxin importer genes leads to a delay in leaf serration. To investigate the effect of loss of AUX1/LAX gene function on leaf shape, we analysed a series of leaves at various developmental stages from a range of single, double, triple and quadruple aux1/lax mutants (Bainbridge etal., 2008; Peret etal., 2012). A phenotype was only observed in the triple mutant aux1/lax1/lax2 and the quadruple (quad) mutant in which all four aux1/lax genes were mutated (Figure2). In WT leaves, the early primordium had a relatively smooth margin with slight undulations towards the base (Figure2a). Subsequently, overt serration occurred at positions towards the leaf base (Figure2d). As development proceeded, serrations arose in more proximal positions (Figure2g); however, the higher relative growth rate of the main body of the leaf compared to the serrations meant that these outgrowths were not as pronounced in the mature leaf as in earlier stages of leaf development, as previously described (Kuwabara etal., 2011). In the aux1/lax1/lax2 mutants, serrations were not visible at early leaf stages (Figure2b,e) but were apparent during later stages (Figure2h). These serrations formed in an appropriate position (i.e. towards the base of the leaf), but differential growth was limited so the serrations were never as pronounced as those observed in WT leaves. Similarly, quad mutants showed a lack of overt serration during early primordium development (Figure2c,f) but serrations were apparent at later stages (Figure2i), although again these were never as pronounced as in the WT and the overall leaf shape tended not to be as symmetrical as in WT. In contrast, the leaf margins of aux1/lax1, aux1/lax3 and aux1/lax2 double mutants mutants were indistinguishable from those of the WT at all developmental stages (FigureS1). The growth rate of the aux1/lax1/lax2 and quad leaves was slower than for WT or single or double mutant combinations. To allow a quantitative comparison of leaf shape during development in the various genetic backgrounds, we used LEAFPROCESSOR software (Backhaus etal., 2010) to analyse leaf profiles normalized for size differences. Our previous work had indicated that two parameters are especially useful for discriminating 2D leaf shape in different genetic backgrounds: compactness (a measure of the ratio of circumference to area) and bending energy (a measure of integrated curvature around the leaf perimeter). As shown in Figure2(j,k), the late stage leaves of aux1/lax1/lax2 plants had statistically significantly lower values for these parameters compared with WT leaves, consistent with a smoother, less serrated shape.. Previous work established that PIN1 and CUC2 play a major role in serration formation, with PIN protein localization indicating auxin flux towards presumptive serration tips and CUC2 accumulation indicating intervening sinuses (Bilsborough etal., 2011). An examination of PIN1 and CUC2 expression using ProPIN1:PIN1-GFP, ProCUC2:CUC2-RFP and ProCUC2:GUS transgenes revealed no differences in the expression patterns of these proteins in the quad mutant compared to WT (Figure3). Thus, although the final extent of serration growth was less in the quad mutant, the patterning process was comparable in both the WT and quad mutant background. Thus, whenever a serration formed along the margin, the position of the serration outgrowth was defined by PIN1 orientation on the flank of the presumptive outgrowth pointing towards the lobe tip, both in the WT (Figure3a,b) and the quad mutant (Figure3g,h). Similarly, CUC2 expression was elevated in the sinuses between serrations in both WT (Figure3c-f) and quad mutant leaves (Figure3i-l), as visualized using RFP (Figure3c,d,i,j) and GUS (Figure3e,f,k,l) reporter gene lines. With respect to ProDR5:GUS expression, in the early stages of primordium development of quad plants, the signal was apparent at the tip of the leaf (Figure3m), and, as development proceeded, signals appeared later along the flanks of the primordia, but only as serrations were formed (Figure3o), and the signal was broader and weaker compared with the WT expression pattern (Figure1d). LAX1 promoter activity was still high at the tips of early and mid-stage primordia in the quad background (Figure3q,r) and in regions of serration tip formation (Figure3s), comparable to the pattern observed in WT (Figure3t), although the altered growth rate of tissues in the various genetic backgrounds resulted in different absolute distances of peak formation. Investigation of LAX2 expression in the quad background showed that the pattern of gene expression was similar to that observed in WT leaves at equivalent developmental stages, with LAX2 expression being initially constrained towards the distal leaf tip but excluded from the outer cell layers of the margin at all stages of development (Figure3u-x).. . Figure 3. . . PIN,CUC2,DR5 and LAX1 gene expression patterns define serrations in WT and quad mutant leaves.. (a-l) Expression patterns of ProPIN. 1:GFP (a,b,g,h), ProCUC. 2:RFP (c,d,i,j) and ProCUC. 2:GUS (e,f,k,l) in serrations forming on the margin of WT (a-f) and quadruple aux1/lax mutant (quad) leaves (g-l) at various stages of serration formation. In (a,b,g,h), arrowheads indicate the tip of early-stage serrations. In (c,d,i,j), arrowheads indicate the sinus between serration outgrowths. The ProPIN. 1:GFP signal is asymmetrically localized in cells, suggesting a flow of auxin towards the tip of serrations, whereas CUC2 expression is localized within the sinuses of serrations in both genetic backgrounds.. (m-p) ProDR. 5:GUS expression (blue) in the quad mutant background at the early-stage (m) and mid-stage (n) of leaf 5 development was observed at the tip of the primordium, and, at a later stage of development (o), at the tip of serrations. ProDR. 5:GUS expression in WT is shown for comparison (p).. (q-t) Analysis of ProLAX. 1:GUS leaves shows a comparable expression pattern at the leaf tip during the early-stage (q) and mid-stage (r) of development, with signal (blue) also apparent within the serrations that form later in development of the quad leaves (s) compared to WT (t).. (u-x) The images in (u), (v) and (w) show stages of development equivalent to those in (m), (n) and (o), respectively, for ProLAX. 2:GUS in a quad background. Signal is constrained to the more distal region of the leaf during early development, and is excluded from the outer cell layers at all stages of development, as also seen in WT serrations (x).. Arrows in (p), (t) and (x) indicate small serrations. Exemplar images are shown from the analysis of at least six independent plants for each reporter gene construct in each genetic background. Scale bars=50mum (a-m,r,v), 100mum (n,r,v) and 80mum (o,p,s,t,w,x).. . . . In addition to the use of mutants, auxin transport may be manipulated by exogenous supply of inhibitors, and previous reports indicated that treatment of Arabidopsis plants with NPA (N-1-Naphthyphthalamic acid) leads to a smoother leaf margin (Mattsson etal., 2003). Control plants showed a normal pattern of serration during development, with PDR5:GUS expression at the primordium tip (Figure4a), at the tips of serrations and in portions of an internal network (Figure4b,c). When NPA was supplied to plants at 1mum, serration was inhibited in a manner similar to that described for the aux1/lax1/lax2 and quad mutants (i.e. serration still occurred and was still restricted to the base of the leaf, but it occurred later than in the untreated control leaves) (Figure4d-l). Analysis of ProDR5::GUS expression in NPA-treated leaves indicated the presence of an appropriate pattern of auxin maxima at the presumptive tips of serrations but with decreased signal intensity (Figure4d-f). After NPA treatment, LAX1 gene expression occurred at the tips of serrations, although, as described above, these serrations were less pronounced than in non-treated leaves (Figure4g-i). The pattern of LAX2 gene expression in NPA-treated leaves was similar to that observed in control leaves, being restricted towards the distal region of the leaf and excluded from the outer cell layers (Figure4j-l).. . Figure 4. . . DR5,LAX1 and LAX2 expression patterns in leaves after N-1-Naphthyphthalamic acid (NPA) treatment.. Analysis of ProDR. 5:GUS (a-f), ProLAX. 1:GUS (g-i) and ProLAX. 2:GUS (j-l) expression in early-stage (a,d,g,j), mid-stage (b,e,h,k) and late-stage (c,f,i,l) primordia. (a-c) Analysis for control plants; (d-l) analysis for plants treated with 1mum . NPA. Exemplar images are shown from the analysis of at least six independent plants for each reporter gene construct line after treatment with NPA. Scale bars=50mum.. . . . . . Modelling the role of auxin importers in the leaf margin. To further explore how the patterns of AUX1/LAX gene expression relate to the observed phenotypes, we used a modelling approach. Our initial model (model variant A) was adapted from that described by Bilsborough etal. (2011) but modified to include rules based on the AUX1/LAX gene expression patterns reported above and in the literature, and simplified with respect to assumptions regarding PIN localization. As shown in Figure5, we first introduced a positive feedback loop of auxin import linked to the local auxin concentration, representing both the observed correlation of LAX1 expression with regions of localized DR5 expression along the leaf margin and other data suggesting a link between auxin import and auxin levels (Heisler and Jonsson, 2006). Second, we imposed a drain of auxin from margin cells in a region symmetrically positioned around the leaf distal tip to simulate the outcome of the observed initial localization of LAX2 expression in a distally located sub-epidermal region of the leaf during the early stages of leaf growth. Third, we set an initially uniform auxin import rate setalong the entire perimeter to reflect the observed AUX1 expression pattern at the early stage of primordium formation. Details of this model are described in Model S1.. . Figure 5. . . AUX/PAT/CUC2 model for margin patterning.. The concentration of auxin regulates the localization of PIN auxin exporters within a cell, directing them to either the left or right border using an up the gradient rule with respect to neighbouring cells. The process by which auxin modulates PIN localization is modulated by the CUC2 transcription factor, the level of which is inversely correlated with auxin level. The level of LAX1 is positively regulated by the level of auxin, which is itself positively regulated by the LAX1 level in a positive feedback loop. Auxin is drained from the system by LAX2, and this drain is counteracted by auxin influx via AUX1. Details of the model are provided in Model S1. Items in black represent the model parameters included in the original model (Bilsborough etal., 2011), and the items in red indicate the new parameters included in the AUX/PAT/CUC2 model.. . . . The outputs of the model are displayed as space/time plots (Figure6). In these plots, the leaf margin is represented as a line of cells with the margin extremities at the top and bottom of the y axis and the distal tip, equivalent to the margin mid-point, located at the mid-point of the y axis (cell 50). Auxin concentration is depicted as a colour spectrum, with maxima indicated by regions of bright yellow and troughs as dark blue. As in the original model, we make the assumption that a local gradient in auxin level is somehow read out by the cells in that region as a gradient in growth response, leading to initiation of morphogenesis (i.e. serration). The extent of growth (i.e. serration size) is not explicitly modelled, but is assumed to be proportional to the integrated level of auxin.. . Figure 6. . Analysis of the AUX/PAT/CUC2 model.. Space/time displays of auxin levels as output of an AUX/PAT/CUC2 model in which the leaf margin is depicted as a row of cells (y axis) with the extremities of the margin at cell1 and cell100 and the distal tip of the leaf margin at cell50. Auxin level is indicated by a spectrum of colour from low (blue) to high (yellow).. (a) The basic model in which auxin peaks are restricted to the margin periphery and excluded from the central region of the margin. Auxin peaks initiate at time point 2.5, with the last peak initiating at time point 5.. (b,c) A lax1 mutant model (b) and an aux1 mutant model (c) in which the overall pattern of auxin peaks (both in space and time) remains similar to that shown in (a).. (d) Loss of LAX2 leads to the emergence of auxin peaks along the entire margin and a delay in formation of the first auxin peak.. (e) In the aux1/lax1/lax2 mutant model, auxin peaks occur along the entire margin, but the emergence of the auxin pattern is greatly delayed.. (f) A modified version of the model shown in (a) in which an auxin sensitivity window is imposed, indicated by the translucent blue coloration. Loss of auxin sensitivity occurs first at the most distal margin cell (cell50) at time point 2. Over subsequent iterations, an adjacent margin cell loses auxin sensitivity, leading to linear loss of auxin sensitivity over time until all margin cells become insensitive to auxin by time point 10.. (g-j) Introduction of the auxin sensitivity window to the model for mutant lax1 (g), aux1 (h), lax2 (i) and aux1/lax1/lax2 (j). In some cases (g,h,i), auxin peaks emerge for a distinct period before the loss of auxin sensitivity, whereas in others (j), auxin peaks occur for only a brief period before auxin sensitivity is lost. If the integral of auxin level (yellow peak value) is proportional to local growth, then the models lead to differential serration growth.. . . . This model generates a symmetrical pattern along the perimeter with alternating peaks and troughs of auxin level (Figure6a). The expression of LAX2 around the leaf tip drains auxin away from the margin in this region, ensuring that no auxin maxima are formed. This is predicted to lead to a lack of serrations in this region, as observed in WT Arabidopsis leaves (Figure2d,g). Interestingly, the LAX2-defined drain generates an internal boundary within the margin, and, as a consequence, peaks of auxin form in a temporal sequence, with peaks towards the leaf tip occurring before peaks at the leaf base. Thus the first auxin peak forms at approximately time point 2.5, and the last auxin maximum occurs at approximately time point 5. This reproduces the situation observed in real leaves, in which serration occurs with a pronounced distal-to-proximal temporal pattern.. The model presented in Figure6(a) captured some elements of margin patterning that were not apparent in the original model. The precise timing of peak occurrence and the relative intensity of the peaks depended on the values given to the various parameters, but the basic output (lack of peaks in the distal region and the temporal sequence of peak formation from distal to proximal region) was consistent. The model did not automatically generate a peak of auxin at the distal tip of the leaf, but analysis of auxin-response constructs in transgenic plants consistently indicates that this is present (Mattsson etal., 2003). A significant body of evidence suggests that this initial peak of auxin signalling is intrinsically linked to the process of leaf initiation, i.e. it is already set within the leaf at formation (Reinhardt etal., 2003). Although we imposed this central auxin peak within early versions of our model, we found that its presence had little effect on subsequent model behaviour, so, for simplicity, it is not included in the variants shown.. To investigate how well the model captures the phenotypes observed in mutants, we explored the outcome of removal of components of the model. As shown in Figure6(b,c), removal of either the LAX1 or AUX1 components had relatively little effect on model output for each parameter set. Patterning was slightly delayed in the proximal regions of the margin compared with the WT model (Figure6a), but the distribution and timing of auxin peak formation was essentially unchanged. This relatively limited outcome of removal of the LAX1 and AUX1 components was consistent with the observed lax1 or aux1 single mutations, in which no obvious change in serration was observed. However, when LAX2 was removed from the model (as shown in Figure6d for the lax2 mutant and Figure6e for the aux1/lax1/lax2 mutant), a fundamental change in patterning occurred. First, and most obviously, auxin peaks were predicted to occur throughout the margin, including the distal region. This would lead to serration being initiated in the distal leaf margin, but this phenotype was never observed in the lax2 or aux1/lax1/lax2 mutant leaves. Another consequence of the loss of LAX2, which was most apparent in the aux1/lax1/lax2 mutant model and to a lesser extent in the lax2 model, was that the time taken for auxin patterning to be established was greatly delayed (Figure6d,e). Again, the absolute time taken for peaks to emerge depended on the parameters used, but the results were consistent for each set of parameters explored. Thus, in the lax2 mutant model shown in Figure6(d), auxin peaks occurred uniformly at approximately time point 5, and, in the aux1/lax1/lax2 mutant model (Figure6e), auxin peaks did not arise until approximately time point 7, much later than the slowest-forming auxin peaks in the WT and lax2 models (Figure6a).. . . Reconciling model and reality: exploring the roles of auxin sensitivity and leaf growth rate. The model described above has a major discrepancy with respect to one aspect of the biological phenotype observed. In reality, mutants containing lax2 do not form serrations in the distal region of the leaf. To investigate the possible reason for this discrepancy, we considered the potential role of altered auxin sensitivity during development. It is noteworthy that differentiation of margin cells is one of the earliest observable events in leaf development, and, moreover, that it occurs in a temporal wave from the distal tip towards the proximal regions of the margin (Reinhardt etal., 2007). Whether this overt early margin differentiation is linked to altered auxin sensitivity is unknown, but links between auxin signalling and the cell cycle are well-established (Menges etal., 2005; De Veylder etal., 2007; Jurado etal., 2010). To explore this idea, we imposed a temporal wave of auxin insensitivity on the models described in Figure6(a-e) (model variant B). The outputs shown in Figure6(f-j) provide examples based on the assumption of a simple linear loss of auxin sensitivity with time, starting at the most distal (tip) margin cell at time point 2 and progressing towards the proximal region at a set rate such that the entire margin becomes insensitive with respect to the auxin patterning system by time point 10. This pattern of sensitivity loss is clearly arbitrary, but serves as an example of the type of outputs that may result from such sensitivity windows.. For the WT, lax1 and aux1 models, the outputs are very similar after imposition of the auxin sensitivity window (Figure6f-h). If the assumption is made that growth of the resulting serrations depends on the integrated level of auxin over time within any one peak before sensitivity is lost, then the relative size and position of peaks would be similar, as observed in reality. When a sensitivity window is included in the model for the lax2 mutant (Figure6i), peaks of auxin are also still formed in the proximal regions of the margin ahead of the wave of auxin insensitivity in positions similar to WT, such that absolute peak number and position are conserved. The integrated level of auxin within a peak is less than in themodel outputs shown in Figure6(f-h), and therefore the serration growth is predicted to be less in this mutant than in WT or the other single mutants, although the degree of difference depends on the parameter values set. In the aux1/lax1/lax2 mutant model (Figure6j), the loss of all auxin importer activity results in most of the margin losing auxin sensitivity before auxin peaks are established, leading to integrated auxin peak levels being very small (although they still occur in the appropriate positions). Again, if the assumption is made that serration growth depends on the integral of auxin level at a position on the margin, it may be predicted that serration in this mutant still occurs but that the serrations would be much smaller, as indeed observed in the triple and quadruple mutants.. Addition of NPA (auxin transport inhibition) to the model without the sensitivity window led to a similar output to that observed for the quad mutant (FigureS2A versus Figure6e) with the effect depending on the degree to which the transport system was inhibited (equivalent to the concentration of NPA supplied to the tissue) (FigureS2B,C). Incorporation of the auxin sensitivity window meant that there was still potential for auxin peaks to form for a brief time towards the margin periphery (thus some degree of serration) (FigureS2D), or, if auxin transport was severely inhibited (equivalent to very high levels of NPA), total loss of auxin patterning along the leaf margin (FigureS2E,F). Again, if serration growth is related to the integral of the auxin peak level before the loss of auxin sensitivity, the final serration size will be decreased as a result of NPA treatment.. . . Testing the model reveals a role for margin-localized auxin signal transduction in blade/petiole growth. The model developed above introduces a potential role of changing auxin sensitivity in serration formation and growth. To test this hypothesis, we used a previously characterized enhancer trap line (E1439) that drives expression of target genes in a dynamic fashion to the leaf margin (Reinhardt etal., 2007). Expression first occurs in the distal margin, and then extends around the complete margin and petiole as the leaf develops (Figure7a). We used the E1439 line to drive expression of a gain-of-function mutation in axr3-1 (IAA17). This Aux/IAA protein has been shown to alter various plant responses to auxin, although the precise nature of the downstream process (in terms of increased or decreased auxin sensitivity) is complex and is likely to be context-dependent (Leyser etal., 1996; Perez-Perez etal., 2010). The E1439>axr3-1 plants displayed an unexpected phenotype at the whole-organ level. The ratio of the petiole to leaf blade was increased, leading to rosettes with greatly elongated petioles and relatively narrow blades compared with control UAS::axr3-1 plants (Figure7b,c). Quantitative analysis of various leaf size parameters (Figure7g) confirmed this visual impression, with E1439>axr3-1 leaves having a significant (P<0.01) increase in petiole length. There was also a change in blade shape, with E1439>axr3-1 blades being relatively more elongated than the controls. Nevertheless, serrations did form on the E1439>axr3-1 leaves, with the pattern of serration being comparable to that of WT leaves (Figure7d-f).. . Figure 7. . Testing the role of auxin signalling in the leaf margin.. (a) E1439 drives GFP and target gene expression to the leaf margin and petiole.. (b,c) E1349>axr3-1 plants (b) show a phenotype of relatively long petioles and smaller blades compared with control E1439 plants (c). Scale bars=5mm.. (d-f) Exemplar images of young (d), mid-stage (e) and late-stage (f) E1439>axr3-1 leaves show the presence of serrations (observed in six independent plants). Scale bars=100mum (d), 200mum (e) and 500mum (f).. (g) Quantification of petiole and blade size of leaves from E1439>axr3-1 plants and control UAS::axr3-1 plants, revealing differences in size and form. The results are shown for experiments performed with three independent lines of E1439>axr3-1 (LN1, LN2, LN3), and the progeny of three crosses of UAS::axr3-1 plants with Col-0 WT plants. Mean values for the parameters measured (blade length and width, petiole length) are shown, with measurements from leaves of 12 individual plants in each case. A Student's ttest comparing petiole length in E1439>axr3-1 versus UAS::axr3-1 leaves indicated a significant difference (P<0.01) (n=3)..