Results. . F-box protein MAX2 is required for ozone tolerance in Arabidopsis. To identify F-box genes involved in plant responses to environmental stresses we screened a collection of 60T-DNA insertion lines from the F-box protein families C1, C2, C3 and C4 (according to classification by Gagne et al. 2002 [25]) for altered stress responses. This particular group was chosen since it contains, apart from many proteins with unknown function, also the proteins TIR1, COI1 and EBF1 and EBF2 (EIN3 BINDING F-BOX1 and 2) already characterized to be centrally involved in plant hormone signaling [45-47]. As a positive control we used rcd1-4 (radical-induced cell death1) mutant plants which have a well-characterized ozone sensitive phenotype [42].. After 6h exposure to 300ppb of ozone rcd1-4 plants had developed distinct lesions while wild-type plants did not show any signs of damage (Figure1). Of the tested F-box T-DNA lines, approximately 10 displayed varying degree of lesion formation. The line with the most distinct increase in ozone sensitivity, max2-4 (SALK_028336), harbored a T-DNA insertion in a gene encoding the F-box protein MAX2 (MORE AXILLARY GROWTH2), previously well characterized as a negative regulator of polar auxin transport [29]. Interestingly, in response to ozone, the max2-4 plants developed clearly visible and spreading lesions (Figure1A and B). Increased ozone sensitivity was observed also for max2-1 point mutation line [28] confirming that the phenotype was indeed a result from mutation in the MAX2 gene (Figure1A and B). The observed ozone sensitivity was further confirmed by measuring the ion leakage from the max2 mutants and wild-type plants at time points 0, 8 and 24h after beginning of ozone exposure (Figure1C). In max2 mutants the ion leakage was clearly higher compared to wild-type plants. These results strongly indicate that MAX2 contributes to ozone tolerance in Arabidopsis.Figure 1. max2. plants are highly susceptible to ozone. Soil grown four weeks old wild-type Col-0, max2 point mutation (max2-1), Salk (max2-4) and rcd1-4 (as an ozone sensitive control) lines were exposed to 350ppb ozone (O3) for 6h in a controlled O3 chamber. The plants were photographed before and 1day after O3 exposure in order to show cell death on the leaves. A) Non-treated Col-0, max2-1, max2-4 and rcd1-4 lines grown in clean air. B) O3 phenotype of Col-0, max2-1, max2-4 and rcd1-4 lines 1day after 6h O3 exposure. C) Ion leakage in Col-0, max2-1, max2-4 and rcd1-4 lines measured at different time points after O3 exposure indicating the amount of cell death. The result is presented as ratio of ion leakage of total ion concentration. Data represent the meansSE of 3 independent experiments with 5 plants/line in every time point in each experiment. **P<0.01; two-tailed t test.. . . MAX2 provides tolerance to apoplastic O2-. Production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) is a common response to environmental stresses in plants and accordingly, also ozone is known to trigger the production of superoxide (O2- ) in the apoplastic space of plant cells leading to formation of visible lesions in sensitive plants [42]. Since the impaired function of MAX2 had led to increased ozone sensitivity, we wanted to further investigate the contribution of ROS in the observed lesion formation in max2 plants. To address this we employed the extracellular O2- generating system, xanthine (X)/xanthine oxidase (XO) [42,48]. We infiltrated the leaves of wild-type and max2 plants with X/XO and the resulting cell death was measured as relative ion leakage and monitored for 24h. Again, rcd1-4 plants that are known to be sensitive to extracellular ROS [42] were included as positive controls.. Interestingly, in accordance with the observed sensitivity to ozone (Figure1), the accumulation of O2- led to increased ion leakage in both max2 mutant lines in comparison to wild-type (Figure2). In X/XO-infiltrated max2 mutant lines the ion leakage increased 25% during the first hour while in wild type the corresponding increase was 15% (Figure2). Increase in ion leakage was even more distinct during the next 12h. Since X/XO -experiment is done by infiltrating and thus, is independent of stomatal opening, it seems that MAX2 influences plant sensitivity to ROS in the level of mesophyll.Figure 2. Superoxide (O. 2. . -. ) induced cell death in. max2. mutants. Detached leaves from four week old soil grown wild-type Col-0, max2-1, max2-4 and rcd1-4 mutant plants were infiltrated with the O2- generating system xanthine and xanthine oxidase (X/XO). Cell death was measured as relative ion leakage for 24h. Data are meansSE from 3 independent experiments with >20 leaves/line in each experiment. The result is presented as ratio of ion leakage of total ion concentration.. To further characterize the nature of the decreased ROS tolerance observed in max2 mutant lines, we tested if these lines were also more sensitive to methyl viologen that generates ROS inside the chloroplasts. Also here, rcd1-4 plants tolerant to methyl viologen were included as controls [49]. However, no difference was observed in the methyl viologen tolerance of max2 mutant lines in comparison to wild-type plants (Additional file 1: Figure S1). Thus, these results indicate that MAX2 specifically contributes to apoplastic O2- tolerance in Arabidopsis.. . . MAX2 influences stomatal conductance in Arabidopsis. Both ozone as well as pathogens can enter the plant apoplast via natural openings such as stomata [6,42]. We hypothesized that besides increased sensitivity to apoplastic ROS, the sensitivity of max2 plants to ozone could be partly due to altered stomatal function. To validate this hypothesis we first measured stomatal conductance of max2 and wild-type plants with a porometer. Indeed, under normal growth conditions the stomata of max2 mutant plants were significantly more open in comparison to those of wild-type plants (Figure3A).Figure 3. Impaired stomatal function in. max2. mutants. Four-week old wild-type Col-0 and max2 lines were assessed for their stomatal function. A) Stomatal conductance of four-week old non-treated Col-0, max2-1 and max2-4 plants were measured with a porometer. For each line 5 plants were used in each experiment and the results are shown as meansSE. Experiments were repeated 5 times with similar results. **P<0.01; two-tailed t test. B) Four-week old soil-grown Col-0 and max2 plants fresh weight change was measured by cutting the leaves and leaving them to dry for 4h. For each line 5 plants were used in each experiment and the results are shown as meansSE. Experiments were repeated 5 times with similar results.. Additionally, we monitored the fresh weight change of excised leaves, which also reflects the amount of gas exchange and water loss from the plant to the atmosphere. This was done by comparing the weight change in wild-type and max2 mutant plants for 4h. In concert with the results from the porometer measurement, the percentual fresh weight loss of max2 plants was significantly larger than that of wild-type plants (Figure3B), which further indicates a role for MAX2 in stomatal regulation.. The enhanced stomatal conductance of max2 mutants was verified by measuring stomatal conductance of non-treated and ozone exposed max2 plants with a custom made gas-exchange device [50]. In agreement with the porometer measurement, the basal level of stomatal conductance before the ozone exposure was two times higher in the max2 mutant lines than that observed in wild-type plants (Figure4A). However, the application of O3 (in time point 0min) induced rapid stomatal closure in both max2 mutant and wild-type plants. Interestingly, a slight recovery of stomatal conductance was observed after the closure in wild-type plants, but not in max2 plants (Figure4A). This could be explained by the rapid, O3-triggered induction of cell death in max2 mutants, further supported by the quick decrease of general photosynthesis (CO2 uptake, mumol/m2s) in these plants (Figure4B). While the ozone-induced stomatal closure of max2 plants was as rapid as that detected in wild-type plants (Figure4A), the intake of ozone still remained higher (Figure4C) due to the higher stomatal conductance at the beginning of the ozone exposure. Stomatal O3 uptake rate of max2 mutants was higher compared to Col-0 (Figure4D) probably due to more open stomata.Figure 4. MAX2 controls the basal level of stomatal conductance. Effects of 3h 350nmol/mol O3 exposure on stomatal conductance were measured on wild-type Col-0 and max2 mutants with a custom made whole-rosette gas exchange measurement device. A) Stomatal conductance before, during and after 3h O3 exposure of Col-0 and max2 plants. B) CO2 uptake rate of max2 mutants and Col-0 before, during and after 3h O3 exposure. C) Cumulative dose of O3 absorbed by max2 and Col-0 plants before, during and after 3h O3 exposure. D) Stomatal O3 uptake rate of max2 mutants and Col-0. For each line 4 plants were used in the experiment and the results are shown as meansSE. Experiments were repeated twice with similar results.. ABA is a well-known regulator of stomatal closure and plant drought responses [51]. The more open stomata as well as increased water-loss of the max2 plants (Figure3A and B) suggested alterations in ABA-reponses and thus, it was of interest to elucidate if the stomatal response to this phytohormone was altered in these plants. Interestingly, this was not the case since max2 plants displayed wild-type stomatal closure in response to 5muM ABA sprayed onto intact plants (Additional file 1: Figure S2) indicating that at whole plant level MAX2 contributes to the basal level of stomatal conductance rather than to stomatal closure induced by ABA and ozone.. . . MAX2 contributes to resistance to bacterial, but not fungal pathogens. The clearly altered stomatal phenotype implied that impaired expression of MAX2 gene could have an impact on pathogen tolerance in Arabidopsis. To elucidate this, we first investigated the susceptibility of max2 mutant lines to the virulent bacterial hemibiotroph P. syringae DC3000. To this aim we spray-inoculated max2 mutant lines and wild-type plants with the pathogen and followed the symptom development and bacterial growth in planta for five days. Interestingly, max2 mutant plants displayed clearly enhanced susceptibility to P. syringae observed both as heavy yellowing of the infected leaves as well as increased growth of the bacteria in the apoplast (Figure5A and B). To further define the role of MAX2 in pathogen responses, we employed another type of pathogen, a bacterial necrotroph P. carotovorum, the causal agent of bacterial soft rot [52,53]. Interestingly, spray inoculation of the plants with P. carotovorum also resulted in enhanced disease development in the max2 mutant lines seen as more extensive tissue maceration when compared to wild-type plants (Figure5C and D) indicating that the defense-associated role of MAX2 is not dependent on the pathogen lifestyle.Figure 5. max2. mutant lines have decreased resistance to spray inoculated. P. syringae. and. P. carotovorum. . Soil-grown four-week old plants were used to evaluate pathogen tolerance. In each experiment, three plants/line and three leaves/plant were used to check phenotype and to measure the bacterial concentration. All the experiments were repeated at least 4 times with similar results. The results are shown as meansSE. (*P<0.05; **P<0.01; two-tailed t test). A) Phenotype of four week old wild-type Col-0 and max2 mutants after P.syringae infection with the concentration of 1x107 cfu/ml. Picture was taken 5days post inoculation. Upper row shows non-treated plants and lower row P. syringae infected plants. B) Growth of P. syringae in planta was calculated at 0, 4, 8, 24, 48, 72 and 96h after inoculation. C) Phenotype of max2 mutant lines after infection with P.carotovorum. Picture was taken 2days post inoculation. D) Growth of P. carotovorum in planta 0, 6, 24 and 48h after infection.. To assess if the infection method had any impact on the observed disease phenotype, we did local inoculations with P. syringae (infiltration) and P. carotovorum (pipetting the bacterial solution to wounded leaf), thereby providing the bacteria a direct route to plant apoplast. Intriguingly, when P. syringae was applied by infiltration method, slightly enhanced susceptibility was still observed in max2 mutant lines. The same was observed after infection with P. carotovorum, max2 plants demonstrated slight increase in the susceptibility in comparison to wild-type (Additional file 1: Figure S3). The distinct difference observed in pathogen susceptibility resulting from the different inoculation methods indicated that the stomatal phenotype of max2 plants (Figure3A) has a central impact on the outcome of the infection i.e. more open stomata of max2 mutant plants increase bacterial entry to the apoplast of these plants.. The evident contribution of MAX2 in resistance to bacterial pathogens prompted us to elucidate whether this was also the case in plant defense to fungal pathogens. To test this, we infected max2 and wild-type plants with Botrytis cinerea, a fungal necrotroph and followed the symptom development for three days. Interestingly, opposite to observations with P. carotovorum and P. syringae, no difference could be observed in susceptibility between the max2 lines and wild-type plants for B. cinerea (Additional file 1: Figure S4). This indicates that the difference observed in the susceptibility of max2 lines to different pathogens results from the enhanced capability of the bacterial pathogens to take advantage of the impaired stomatal function of max2 lines (Figures3A and 4) when entering the plant apoplast.. . . MAX2 is required for pathogen-triggered stomatal closure. Stomatal closure in response to invading bacteria such as P. syringae is a well-described component of the innate immunity response in Arabidopsis [6]. The more open stomatal aperture in the absence of stress (Figure3A) and the enhanced susceptibility of max2 plants to spray-inoculated P. syringae (Figure5A and B) indicated that the pathogen-triggered stomatal closure could be impaired in these plants. To elucidate this, we infected max2 and wild-type plants with P. syringae bacterial suspension and checked stomatal response to living bacterial cells 0, 1, 2 and 4h after inoculation using fluorescence microscopy using the method introduced by Chitrakar and Melotto 2010 [54]. When max2 and wild-type leaves were incubated with P. syringae stomatal closure was triggered in wild-type plants1h after infection but this was not observed in max2 lines where the stomatal opening was rather getting higher during measured time points (Figure6). P. syringae DC3000 has been shown to induce re-opening of the stomata from 3 to 4h after the initial closure by secreting the phytotoxin coronatine [6]. While this was observed for the wild-type at 4h time point, in max2 plants the stomatal aperture was even larger 2 and 4h after the infection (Figure6). Treatment of max2 and wild-type leaves with MgCl2 buffer solution did not alter the stomatal aperture, but yet, the stomata of max2 plants were clearly more open compared to wild-type (Additional file 1: Figure S5). These results clearly indicate that max2 plants have impaired stomatal closure in response to P. syringae allowing increased numbers of bacteria to enter plant apoplast (Figure5B) leading to more severe susceptibility.Figure 6. Pathogen-triggered stomatal closure is impaired in max2 mutant lines. Four-week old wild-type Col-0 and max2 lines were inoculated with Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato DC3000. A) Measurement of stomatal aperture of wild-type Col-0 and max2 lines in response to P. syringae. Leaves were first stained with 20muM propidium iodide (PI) solution and then inoculated with 300mul of bacterial solution (108cfu/ml). Stomatal aperture width was measured after indicated time points using ImageJ image processing program. B) Representative pictures of stomatal response of Col-0 and max2 lines under florescent microscope using 20x objective 0, 1, 2 and 4h after inoculation with the bacteria. Results are shown as the mean (n=80-100)SE. **P<0.01; two-tailed t test. The experiments were repeated three times with similar results.. . . max2 plants exhibit increased expression of genes triggered by oxidative stress in response to ozone and P. syringae. The enhanced sensitivity of max2 mutants to apoplastic ROS (Figure2) suggested that MAX2 could be involved in responses to oxidative stress. Since both ozone and pathogen infection trigger apoplastic ROS formation, we wanted to study the induction of ROS-responsive genes in max2 and wild-type plants in response to these stresses. For this, we first characterized the expression of GRX480 encoding a glutaredoxin family protein, that is an early ROS responsive gene and is also triggered by ozone [55,56]. Ozone triggered overall higher expression of GRX480 than P. syringae but in both cases the induction of this gene was clearly higher in max2 than in wild-type plants (Figure7A and B). We also characterized the expression of oxidative stress marker gene GST1 (ARABIDOPSIS GLUTATHIONE S TRANSFERASE1) [57] in response to P. syringae. Similarly to GRX480 the accumulation of GST1 transcripts was also enhanced in max2 plants when compared to wild-type plants but to higher level (Figure7C). These observations suggest that max2 plants might be more sensitive to ROS and that MAX2 is involved in oxidative stress responses.Figure 7. The expression of oxidative stress marker genes in. max2. lines is upregulated. Mature leaves of 4-week old soil grown wild-type Col-0 and max2 plants were collected at indicated time points after P. syringae DC3000 infection and RNA was extracted to check the relative expression of oxidative stress marker gene GRX480 after 350ppb for 6h ozone exposure (A) and after pathogen infection (B). Another oxidative stress marker gene GST1. (C) and auxin-responsive gene HAT2. (D) also checked after pathogen infection. For this analysis, 3 plants/line and 3 leaves/plant were used in each time point of infection and ozonation. Each expression analysis is based on a minimum of 3 independent experiments. Asterisks indicate significant differences, as determined by Students t-test (*P<0.05; **P<0.01; two-tailed t test).. Moreover, the expression of HAT2, an auxin-responsive homeobox-leucine zipper gene has been shown to decrease in response to ozone-triggered ROS [55]. Therefore, it was of interest to check if the expression of this gene was altered in max2 plants where auxin homeostasis was modulated and same was indicated for ROS responses (Figure7D). Similarly to Blomster et al. 2011 [55] the levels of HAT2 were decreased in wild-type plants in response to ozone and it was even slightly lower in max2 in the early timepoints (Additional file 1: Figure S6). However, P. syringae triggered expression of HAT2 was clearly lower in max2 when compared to wild-type plants (Figure7D). The decreased induction of this gene in max2 plants might be an indication of altered responsiveness to apoplastic ROS in these plants.. The expression of the ROS responsive genes GRX480, GST1 and HAT2 suggested that the sensitivity to apoplastic ROS might have altered in max2 plants. Therefore, we wanted to further clarify whether MAX2 indeed influences the the sensitivity to or rather the cellular level of ROS we performed O2- and H2O2 stainings after ozone exposure and P. syringae infection. These semiquantitative stainings did not reveal visible differences between wild-type and max2 mutant lines (data not shown). The lack of enhanced ROS production further underlines that the enhanced gene expression triggered by oxidative stress is likely to be due to altered ROS-sensitivity in max2 plants.. . . Expression of auxin receptor genes is downregulated in max2 plants. MAX2 has been shown to negatively regulate polar auxin transport in Arabidopsis i.e. auxin transport is increased in max2 mutants [29]. Furthermore, the expression of SAUR-genes is enhanced in max2 plants indicating increased auxin response [58]. Auxin homeostasis has been shown to influence some plant-pathogen interactions [59] and interestingly, also max2 mutants were more sensitive to phytopathogens than wild-type plants. Thus, we wanted to explore whether auxin-related gene expression was also altered in max2 plants in response to P. syringae DC3000. Suprisingly, we noticed that the expression of the auxin receptor genes AUXIN SIGNALING F-BOX PROTEIN1 (AFB1) and TRANSPORT INHIBITOR RESPONSE1 (TIR1) was altered in max2 lines in comparison to wild-type plants. While P. syringae triggered AFB1 induction in wild-type plants, this was not observed in max2 plants (Figure8A). Furthermore, TIR1 expression was decreased in max2 plants already before pathogen inoculation and remained in significantly lower level than in wild-type during the course of infection (Figure8B). This could reflect the attempt of the plant to reduce the increased auxin response by downregulating the expression of the corresponding receptors.Figure 8. Expression of auxin marker genes in. max2. lines are downregulated. Leaves from 4-week old soil grown wild-type Col-0 and max2 line plants were collected at indicated time points after P. syringae DC3000 infection and used to extract RNA to check the relative expression of auxin marker genes, AFB1. (A) and TIR1. (B). For this analysis, 3 plants/line and 3 leaves/plant were used. Results are based on a minimum of 3 independent experiments. Asterisks indicate significant differences, as determined by Students t-test (*P<0.05; **P<0.01; two-tailed t test).. . . Phytohormone levels are altered in max2 mutant plants. To correlate the changes seen in stomatal phenotype and susceptibility to pathogens with possible alterations in endogenous hormone levels of max2, we measured the accumulation of ABA and SA (i) in non-stressed growth conditions, (ii) ABA-level after the leaves were excised and left to dry and (iii) (Figure9A) and SA-level after P. syringae infection (Figure9B). Interestingly, ABA levels in the max2 mutant plants were higher already 30min after excising the leaves and remained higher than in the leaves of wild-type plants until 4h reflecting the increased water loss of max2 plants (Figure3A).Figure 9. Altered phytohormone levels in Col-0 and. max2. mutant lines. Hormone levels in max2 mutant plants were measured in response to both drought (excised leaves) for ABA and pathogen infection (P. syringae DC3000) for SA. The results shown are representative of both max2 mutant lines. A) ABA levels of max2 mutant plants in response to drought. The values are meansSE of 2 independent experiments with 3 biological repeats in each experiment. Asterisks indicate significant differences, as determined by Students t-test (*P<0.05; **P<0.01; two-tailed t test). B) The leaves of 4-week old Col-0 and max2 mutant plants were inoculated with P. syringae and collected for analysis of SA level. The values are meansSE of 2 independent experiments with 3 biological repeats in each experiment. Asterisks indicate significant differences, as determined by Students t- test (*P<0.05; two-tailed t test).. Both P. syringae and P. carotovorum trigger SA-dependent defense signaling in Arabidopsis [2,60,61]. Therefore, it was intriguing to determine, if the accumulation of endogenous SA was altered in max2 plants in response to P. syringae and would contribute to the increased susceptibility of the plants. Interestingly, the only significant difference in pathogen-triggered SA-level between max2 mutant and wild-type was 24h after pathogen inoculation when the accumulation of SA was clearly higher in max2 plants (Figure9B). This could reflect the response of the plants to the dramatic increase in bacterial growth observed in planta at the same time (Figure5B).. . . Expression of SA related marker gene PR1 is upregulated in max2 plants. SA is known to contribute to the resistance to P. carotovorum and P. syringae [2,3]. Considering the decreased pathogen resistance of max2 plants, in addition to the stomatal phenotype, the impact of possibly altered defense signaling could not be ruled out. To further explore the cause for the obvious decrease in plant resistance we characterized the expression of both SA- and JA-pathway marker genes in response to P. syringae infection. The expression of the marker gene for SA-dependent defense signaling, PR1 (PATHOGENESIS-RELATED GENE1) was significantly upregulated in wild-type plants 48h after the spray inoculation. However, in max2 mutant plants PR1 was clearly induced already at 24h and interestingly, at 48h the expression of this gene was at least twice as high in max2 as that observed in wild-type plants (Figure10). The expression of PR1 clearly indicates that the activation of SA-dependent defenses is enhanced in max2 plants. Intriguingly, despite this max2 plants are more susceptible to P. carotovorum and also P. syringae that should be contained by SA-mediated defense signaling.Figure 10. The expression of SA related marker gene. PR1. is upregulated in. max2. lines in response to. P. syringae. . Relative expression of PR1 after P. syringae infection. Four-week old soil-grown plants were sprayed with P.syringae and samples collected at indicated time points for extraction of RNA. Asterisks indicate significant differences, as determined by Students t-test (*P<0.05; two-tailed t test). For each experiment, 3 plants/line and 3 leaves/plant were used.. While not central in defense to P. syringae or P. carotovorum in Arabidopsis, JA-dependent defense can still modulate the outcome of the interaction between these pathogens and Arabidopsis [2,61,62]. Therefore, in order to see if JA signaling was altered in max2 lines and thus, would in its part influence the decreased resistance of these plants we examined the expression of JA-related marker genes HEL (HEVEIN-LIKE) and VSP2 (VEGETATIVE STORAGE PROTEIN2) [63] after inoculation with P. syringae. We could not observe any difference in the expression of these marker genes between max2 and wild-type plants (data not shown) and conclude that JA does not contribute to the altered pathogen responses of max2 plants..
