Results. . ABA promotes FT expression through CO. Mutants of aba1-6 were later flowering compared with the wild type under LDs (Fig. 1A-C). We confirmed a similar late flowering phenotype in aba2-1 mutants, defective in the final steps of ABA biosynthesis (Finkelstein, 2013). Soil applications of ABA could accelerate flowering in wild-type plants, reminiscent of DE response (Fig. 1A; Supplementary Table S1) (Koops et al., 2011). Using this experimental set-up, we could also largely rescue the late flowering of aba1-6 and aba2-1 mutants, indicating a role for ABA as an activator of flowering (Fig. 1A, B).. We have previously demonstrated that ABA activates flowering under LDs but not SDs and that ABA affects photoperiodic signalling upstream of FT expression (Riboni et al., 2013). To understand how ABA interacts with photoperiod signalling to affect flowering, we generated combinations of ABA-deficient (aba1-6) and photoperiodic pathway mutants (Fig. 1C, D; Supplementary Table S1). Consistent with lack of flowering defects of aba1-6 under SDs (Riboni et al., 2013), double mutants of gi-2 aba1-6 displayed a similar flowering time compared with gi-2 single mutants under LDs (Fig. 1C, F). Since double mutants of ft-10 aba1-6 were later flowering than ft-10 single mutants, ABA could affect flowering time via other florigen genes, namely TSF (Fig. 1C, F). The tsf-1 ft-10 aba1-6 triple mutants were slightly later flowering than tsf-1 ft-10 double mutants (Fig. 1C, F). TSF thus contributes to the late flowering phenotype of ft-10 aba1-6 plants although ABA also appears to have an effect on other floral pathways, independent of FT and TSF. Interestingly, double mutants of co-10 aba1-6 were similar to co-10 single mutants, indicating that CO is also required for the late flowering phenotype of aba1-6 mutants (Fig. 1D).. Unlike gi, co mutants generate a DE response, indicating that high levels of ABA accumulation, as a result of drought stress, may eventually overcome CO function to activate flowering (Riboni et al., 2013). To test whether drought could activate the florigen genes in the absence of a functional CO protein we grew wild-type and co-10 mutant plants under control or water stress conditions in SDs before shifting to LDs to induce a photoperiodic response. As expected, in wild-type plants FT expression was strongly up-regulated during the photo-extension period and even further increased under low watering conditions (Fig. 2A). In the co-10 mutants, the levels of FT transcripts were barely detectable at any time point, independent of the watering regime, indicating that drought stress cannot cause FT up-regulation in the absence of a functional CO (Fig. 2B). The pattern of accumulation of TSF showed diurnal oscillations similar to those of FT in wild-type plants, peaking at dusk during the photo-extension period (Fig. 2A, B). Similar to FT, TSF expression was increased in coincidence with the photo-extension period under drought conditions. Furthermore in co-10 mutants, TSF levels were much lower compared with the wild type under normal watering conditions, confirming a role for CO in TSF transcriptional activation (Yamaguchi et al., 2005; Jang et al., 2009). Surprisingly, drought stress caused TSF up-regulation in the co-10 background, partially resuming its diurnal cycle with peaks at ZT8 under the SD part of the experiment and at ZT15 following a photo-extension. Slightly increased TSF levels were observed during SDs under drought conditions (on average 3.8  1.6-fold) but this was not correlated with a DE phenotype under SDs in co-10 mutants (Fig. 2B, D). Thus, unlike FT, TSF can be up-regulated under drought conditions in a CO-independent manner.. . Fig. 2.. . CO is required for the activation of FT under drought stress. (A-C) Real-time qPCR of CO, FT, and TSF transcripts in 3-week-old wild-type (Col-0) (A), co-10, (B) and hab1-1 abi1-2 pp2ca-1 (C) seedlings. Plants were subject to normal watering (NW; black lines) or low watering (LW; grey lines) regimes and harvested at the indicated time points in coincidence with the light phase (open bar) or in the dark (black bar) during an SD to LD shift. At each time point, values represent fold change variations of CO, FT, and TSF transcript levels relative to Col-0 under NW. ACT2 expression was used for normalization; error bars represent the SD of two technical replicates. A representative experiment of two biological replicates is shown.. . . . . . GI is required for DE downstream of CO transcriptional activation. Our experiments indicate that ABA promotes FT transcript accumulation through CO. However, CO transcript levels are not greatly affected by drought stress or when ABA level are reduced (Han et al., 2013; Riboni et al., 2014). Here we wanted to test whether drought could affect flowering downstream of CO transcriptional activation events, by analysing mutants of cdf1-R cdf2-1 cdf3-1 cdf5-1, hereafter referred to as cdf1235, characterized by constitutively elevated CO levels (Fornara et al., 2009). The cdf1235 mutants flowered early and produced a DE response quantitatively similar to that of the wild type under LDs (Fig. 3A). Despite their early flowering phenotype under SDs, cdf1235 plants did not produce any DE response (Fig. 3B), suggesting a requirement for LDs in DE response, even when CO levels are elevated (Fornara et al., 2009) (Fig. 3C). We therefore compared the flowering time and DE response of the quadruple cdf1235 mutant with that of gi cdf1235 quintuple mutants under LDs (Fig. 3A). As previously shown, mutants of cdf1235 are slightly earlier flowering than gi cdf1235 under normal watering conditions (Fornara et al., 2009). However, while the cdf1235 mutants produced a DE response, the gi cdf1235 did not (Fig. 3A). We next sought to ascertain if the lack of DE response in the gi cdf1235 mutants was correlated with impaired transcriptional up-regulation of the florigen genes under drought stress. Control and water-stressed wild-type, cdf1235 and gi cdf1235 plants were grown under SD conditions for 2 weeks before shifting to LDs, and transcript levels were analysed at ZT8 (corresponding to dusk in the SDs) and ZT12 (4 h after the photo-extension) (Fig. 3C-E). As expected, the levels of CO transcript were generally higher in cdf1235 and gi cdf1235 mutants as compared with the wild type. Under drought conditions, we observed a small increase in CO transcript abundance in all the genotypes analysed at any time point, suggesting a contribution of drought stress in CO transcript accumulation (Fig. 3C). We finally determined how different patterns of CO transcript were correlated with accumulation of florigen genes (Fig. 3D, E). Under well-watered conditions, mutants of cdf1235 showed the largest FT and TSF transcript accumulations before and after the photo-extension period. Mutants of gi cdf1235 displayed levels of FT and TSF intermediate between the wild type and the cdf1235 mutants. This is probably as a result of residual CDF-mediated repression in cdf1235 on both CO and FT promoters (Fornara et al., 2009; Song et al., 2012). However, while both the wild type and the cdf1235 mutants showed a significant and similar up-regulation of FT and TSF under drought stress conditions at ZT12 (2- to 4-fold, respectively), no such up-regulation occurred in the gi cdf1235 mutants (Fig. 3D, E).. . Fig. 3.. . ABA promotes GI and CO functions to activate the florigen genes. (A and B) Mean number of rosette leaves of the wild type (Col-0) and flowering time mutants subject to normal watering (NW; black bars) or low watering (LW; grey bars) regimes grown under LDs (A) and SDs (B). Error bars represent SE n=15. Students t-test P values 0.001 (***), >0.05 not significant (NS) compared with NW. (C-E) Real-time qPCR of CO (C), TSF (D), and FT (E) transcripts in 2-week-old wild-type (Col-0), cdf1-R cdf2-1 cdf3-1 cdf5-1, and cdf1-R cdf2-1 cdf3-1 cdf5-1 gi-100 seedlings. Plants were subject to NW (black columns) or LW (grey columns) regimes and harvested at the indicated Zeitgeber time during a shift from SDs to LDs. ZT8 represents dusk in SDs and ZT12 represents 4 h of photo-extension. At each time point, values represent fold change variations of CO, FT, and TSF transcript levels relative to the wild type at ZT8 under NW. ACT2 expression was used for normalization; error bars represent the SD of two technical replicates. A representative experiment of two biological replicates is shown. (F) Images of representative plants grown under LDs for 27 d. Insets shows a visible inflorescence in elf3-1 aba1-6 double mutants, which is not visible in the wild type. (G) Mean numbers of rosette leaves of the wild type (Col-0) and mutants under LDs. Error bars represent SE, n=5-12. Students t-test P-values 0.001 (***) are shown to indicate differences between mutants and the corresponding mutant containing the aba1-6 allele. (H-K) Real-time qPCR of GI (H), CO (I), FT (J), and TSF (K) transcripts in 12-day-old seedlings grown under LDs and sampled at ZT16. Data shown are from 5-6 biological replicates. Error bars represent SD. Differences between the wild type versus aba1-6 and elf3-1 versus elf3-1 aba1-6 double mutants are here highlighted with P-values 0.01 (**), 0.05 (*), >0.05 not significant (NS), one-way ANOVA with Tukeys HSD (honestly significant difference) test. (This figure is available in colour at JXB online.). . . . In a complementary approach, we asked whether ABA production might be required for FT transcriptional activation when GI levels are increased. Mutants of early flowering 3 (elf3) are extremely early flowering, accumulate high levels of FT, and present increased accumulation of GI transcript and GI protein (Fowler et al., 1999; Kim et al., 2005; Yu et al., 2008). This early flowering phenotype requires ABA since elf3-1 aba1-6 double mutants were significantly later flowering compared with elf3-1 single mutants (Fig. 3F, G). FT and TSF transcript levels were slightly but not significantly reduced in aba1-6 mutants compared with the wild type at this early developmental stage (Fig. 3J, K; Supplementary Table S2). However, double mutants of elf3-1 aba1-6 had a significant reduction in both FT and TSF levels compared with the elf3-1 single mutants (Fig. 3J, K; Supplementary Table S2). The reduced levels of FT and TSF in elf3-1 aba1-6 compared with elf3-1 mutants were not caused by diminished GI or CO transcript accumulations (Fig. 3H, I; Supplementary Table S2), indicating that ABA might be required for the activation of GI and CO signalling.. . . ABA signalling genes control FT transcript accumulation with little effect on CO. We analysed ABA-hypersensitive mutants plants hab1-1 abi1-2 pp2ca-1, impaired in three ABA-related PP2C phosphate genes, under different watering and photoperiodic conditions (Rubio et al., 2009). Consistent with previous observations, mutants of hab1-1 abi1-2 pp2ca-1 had much increased (up to 6-fold) levels of FT compared with the wild type under LDs (Riboni et al., 2013) (Fig. 2C). The experiment in Fig. 2C also shows that FT expression was even further activated under drought conditions compared with the wild type (up to 13.3-fold). In contrast, TSF expression was not clearly increased in hab1-1 abi1-2 pp2ca-1 plants compared with the wild type under any watering condition. No FT or TSF up-regulation occurred under SDs in the hab1-1 abi1-2 pp2ca-1 mutants under any watering condition.. Under control conditions the strong up-regulation of FT in hab1-1 abi1-2 pp2ca-1 plants was not caused by increased CO levels, which were comparable with those observed in the wild type (Fig. 2C). Increased levels of CO were, however, observed in the hab1-1 abi1-2 pp2ca-1 mutants under drought stress, indicating that high levels of ABA signalling can ultimately induce the transcriptional activation of CO (Koops et al., 2011; Yoshida et al., 2014).. To explore further the role of ABA signalling in the transcriptional control of FT, we analysed abi1-1 mutant plants (Ler background), carrying a dominant mutation in the PP2C phosphatase ABI1 (Koornneef et al., 1984) which results in severely reduced ABA responses. abi1-1 mutant plants did not show flowering defects under LDs, but exhibited an early flowering phenotype under SDs, consistent with previous observations (Martnez-Zapater et al., 1994; Chandler et al., 2000) (Fig. 4A, B). Ruling out an ecotype-specific effect for ABA action in flowering, the ABA biosynthetic mutants aba1-1 and aba1-3 (Ler background) showed a marginal late flowering phenotype compared with the wild type under LDs (ANOVA P<0.01 and P<0.05, respectively), but no defects under SDs (Fig. 4A, B). The late flowering phenotype of these aba1 mutants was more pronounced under drought conditions and LDs, indicative of a reduced DE response (Fig. 4A). Mutants of abi1-1 were even more impaired in the DE response compared with the aba1 alleles, producing on average 14  2% more leaves (n = 8 independent experiments, 15 plants each), relative to the untreated control.. . Fig. 4.. . A negative role for ABA in flowering. (A and B) Mean number of rosette leaves of the wild type (Ler) and ABA-deficient or signalling mutants grown under LDs and subject to normal watering (NW; black bars) or low watering (LW; grey bars) regimes (A), or under SDs in NW regime (B). Error bars represent SE n=15. Students t-test P-values 0.001 (***), >0.05 not significant (NS), compared with NW (A). One-way ANOVA with Tukeys HSD (honestly significant difference) test P-values 0.01 (**), >0.05 not significant (NS), compared with the wild type (B). (C-H) Histochemical GUS detection in transgenic seedlings expressing pFT::GUS (C) and (F), pABA2::GUS (D) and (G), and pABI1::GUS (line # 1) (E) and (H) in the Col-0 background, scale bars=100 m. (This figure is available in colour at JXB online.). . . . We next analysed the pattern of accumulation of the florigen genes in abi1-1 plants. As expected, in wild-type plants, the accumulation of FT was strongly induced under drought conditions in a photoperiod-dependent manner (Fig. 5A). TSF expression was instead down-regulated under drought conditions in the Ler background, revealing an ecotype-specific effect for TSF regulation under drought (Fig. 5A). Lower levels of FT and TSF were observed in the aba1-1 mutants compared with the wild type under both normal watering (TSF) and drought conditions (FT and TSF), confirming the contribution of ABA in both FT and TSF regulation (Fig. 5B) (Riboni et al., 2013). Strikingly, in abi1-1 plants the levels of FT were dramatically reduced compared not only with the wild type but also with aba1-1 plants, under any watering condition analysed (Fig. 5C). Such low expression of the florigen genes did not depend on reduced CO transcript accumulation in abi1-1 which was, if anything, up-regulated (Fig. 5C). Taken together, our data point to a model where ABA affects accumulation of florigen genes without an effect on CO expression.. . Fig. 5.. . ABA activates GI signalling and florigen expression with little effect on CO transcript accumulation. (A-E) Real-time qPCR of CO, FT, and TSF transcripts in 2-week-old wild-type (Ler) (A), aba1-1 (B), abi1-1 (C), 35S::GI (D), and 35S::GI abi1-1 (E) seedlings. Plants were subject to normal watering (NW; black lines) or low watering (LW; grey lines) regimes and harvested at the indicated time points in coincidence with the light phase (open bar) or in the dark (black bar) during an SD to LD shift. At each time point, values represent fold change variations of CO, FT, and TSF transcript levels relative to Ler under NW. ACT2 expression was used for normalization; error bars represent the SD of two technical replicates. A representative experiment of two biological replicates is shown. (F) Mean number of rosette leaves of the wild type (Ler) and mutants grown under SDs and subject to NW (black bars) or LW (grey bars) regimes, Error bars represent SE n=15. Students t-test P-values 0.05 (*), 0.001 (***) compared with NW. (G) Images of representative 5-week-old plants of the indicated genotypes grown under SDs and subject to NW or LW regimes. Scale bar=1 cm. (H) Higher magnification of LW 35S::GI and 35S::GI abi1-1 plants shown in (G). Note the appearance of a bolt in 35S::GI but not in 35S::GI abi1-1.. . . . Loss of PP2C function (as in hab1-1 abi1-2 pp2ca-1) results in increased FT transcript accumulation, while expression of a gain-of-function form of ABI1 (as in abi1-1) leads to reduced FT activation. To determine whether the negative regulation of ABI1 on FT expression could be exerted in the cells expressing FT, we fused a 2.2 kb promoter region of ABI1 to the GUS reporter. We detected GUS staining in several independent transgenic T2 plants (n = 6) with comparable results, at ZT8, where ABI1 transcript accumulation is highly abundant according to a publicly available data set (http://diurnal.mocklerlab.org; Mockler et al., 2007). For comparison, we also studied the pattern of GUS activity in Arabidopsis transgenic lines marking the FT expression domain; the ABA2 (Lin et al., 2006; Kuromori et al., 2014) and the FT promoter itself (Notaguchi et al., 2008). Histochemical detection in young seedlings revealed that ABI1 expression (Fig. 4E) occurred in the vasculature of cotyledons in a pattern similar to ABA2 and FT (Fig. 4C, D), demonstrating an overlap between ABA biosynthesis and signalling genes in the tissue known to be the source of FT protein production. Broadly distributed GUS staining was also observed in the apical region of ABI1::GUS transgenic plants (Fig. 4H). This pattern of expression may also indicate a role for ABA signalling in the shoot apex.. . . Impaired ABA signalling negatively affects GI action. Whether impairing ABA signalling affects GI action was tested by generating abi1-1 35S::GI plants. As previously observed, 35S::GI plants had increased levels of FT under both SDs and LDs compared with the wild type (Mizoguchi et al., 2005). Under drought conditions, FT expression was generally less responsive to drought in the 35S::GI background compared with the wild type (Fig. 5D). The levels of TSF were much more increased in 35S::GI plants compared with the wild type during the SD part of the experiment. However, no further up-regulation of TSF occurred as a result of drought stress compared with normal watering (Fig. 5D). The overaccumulation of FT observed in 35S::GI plants was strongly rescued in the abi1-1 35S::GI mutants under any watering conditions (Fig. 5E). The levels of TSF transcript fell even more severely in abi1-1 35S::GI plants compared with 35S::GI. Such reductions in florigen accumulation in abi1-1 35S::GI plants were not related to decreased CO levels as these were much higher than in the wild type (Fig. 5A, E). Interestingly the levels of CO in abi1-1 35S::GI plants were only mildly reduced compared with 35S::GI, which could suggest that the negative role exerted by abi1-1 protein on GI signalling is more related to FT and TSF regulation rather than to CO (Fig. 5D, E).. Our data describe a regulatory role of ABA in GI signalling. Such ABA-mediated post-transcriptional activation of GI is consistent with previous observations on 35S::GI plants showing a DE-responsive phenotype under SDs (Riboni et al., 2013). In contrast, no DE response occurred in abi1-1 35S::GI mutants, which flowered much later compared with well-watered plants of the same genotype, although still earlier than abi1-1 plants (Fig. 5F). Under normal watering conditions, double mutants of abi1-1 35S::GI had a similar flowering phenotype to 35S::GI plants, despite showing reduced accumulation of the florigen genes (Fig. 5E, F). A similar observation could be made for abi1-1 plants, which did not show flowering defects under LDs compared with the wild type, but had reduced florigen expression (Fig. 5A, C). We conclude that late flowering of abi1-1 or abi1-1 35S::GI plants under drought stress cannot be solely ascribed to reduced florigen up-regulation.. . . A negative role for ABA signalling in flowering. The early flowering of abi1-1 plants under SDs (Fig. 4B) implies that ABA signalling also exerts a negative role in flowering, which is usually undetectable under LDs or in ABA biosynthetic mutants (Fig. 4A). Supporting this model, we have previously reported a delay of flowering time under SDs in mutants of hab1-1 abi1-2 pp2ca-1 and observed a similar phenotype also in hab1-1 abi1-2 abi2-2 plants (Riboni et al., 2013) (Supplementary Fig. S2). abi1-1 mutants showed no increase in FT and TSF levels under SDs (Fig. 5B). In contrast, the accumulation of another floral integrator, SOC1, was increased in abi1-1 plants as compared with the wild type under any photoperiodic condition (Fig. 6A). Mutants of abi1-1 also had strongly reduced levels of FLOWERING LOCUS C (FLC) (Fig. 6B), a transcriptional repressor of SOC1 which contributes to delaying flowering under drought condition (Riboni et al., 2013; Y. Wang et al., 2013; Shu et al., 2016). Since SOC1 integrates different floral pathways in the SAM (Moon et al., 2003; Wang et al., 2009; Song et al., 2012, 2014) which promote flowering under SDs we created the abi1-1 soc1-1 double mutants. Under SDs, these plants displayed a flowering time similar to the soc1-1 single mutants. With respect to flowering time, soc1-1 is thus completely epistatic to abi1-1, indicating that SOC1 activity is required for the early flowering of abi1-1 mutants under SDs (Fig. 6C).. . Fig. 6.. . The inhibitory role of ABA in flowering requires SOC1. (A and B) Real-time qPCR of SOC1 (A) and FLC (B) transcripts in 2-week-old wild-type (Ler) and abi1-1 seedlings. The experimental conditions were described in Fig. 5. ACT2 expression was used for normalization; error bars represent the SD of two technical replicates. A representative experiment of two biological replicates is shown. (C and D) Mean number of rosette leaves of the wild type (Ler) and mutants grown under SDs (C) or LDs (D). Error bars represent SE n=15. Differences between the wild type versus abi1-1 and soc1-1 versus soc1-1 abi1-1 double mutants are here highlighted with P-values 0.001 (***), 0.01 (**), >0.05 not significant (NS), one-way ANOVA with Tukeys HSD (honestly significant difference) test. (E) Model summarizing the proposed modes of ABA action in flowering. In the leaves, under LDs, drought promotes ABA accumulation leading to enhanced GI signalling and activation of florigen genes. CO protein is required for FT up-regulation, but not TSF. At the same time, at the shoot apex ABA represses flowering, downplaying SOC1 signalling, independent of photoperiodic conditions.. . . . Under LDs, abi1-1 soc1-1 double mutants were later flowering than soc1-1 single mutants (Fig. 6D). Thus, the knocking out of SOC1 produces a novel flowering phenotype in the abi1-1 background, consistent with ABA being able to affect flowering differentially in different domains of the plant; by promoting FT expression in the leaves and negatively regulating floral stimuli in the SAM (Fig. 6E)..
