Results. . Opposite effects of DNA methylation and DNA demethylation on basal resistance to Hyaloperonospora arabidopsidis. . To determine impacts of DNA (de)methylation on resistance against biotrophic pathogens, we evaluated a range of Arabidopsis mutants in DNA (de)methylation mechanisms for basal resistance to the obligate biotrophic oomycete Hyaloperonospora arabidopsidis (Hpa). To prevent pleiotropic effects of developmental phenotypes, we only selected mutants with normal (wild-type) growth phenotypes under the conditions of our patho-assays (Figure1a). T-DNA insertions in ros1 (SALK_135293), ros3 (SALK_022363C) and cmt3 (SALK_148381) were confirmed by PCR of genomic DNA (FigureS1a), while transcriptional knock-down of ROS1 and NRPE1 gene expression was confirmed by reverse-transcriptase quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) analysis in ros1 and nrpe1, respectively (FigureS1b). Three-week-old seedlings were spray-inoculated with Hpa conidiospores and collected 6days later for trypan blue staining. Microscopic examination of Hpa colonization revealed that two mutants defective in RdDM, nrpe1 (Pontier etal., 2005) and drd1 (Kanno etal., 2004), showed a statistically significant reduction in the number of leaves producing conidiospores and oospores (class III and IV; Figure1b). The cmt3 mutant, which is defective in maintenance of CHG methylation (Lindroth etal., 2001), also showed enhanced resistance in comparison to Col-0, although to a lesser extent than nrpe1 and drd1 (Figure1b). The ddm1 mutant, which is affected DNA methylation at all sequence contexts in intergenic regions (Vongs etal., 1993; Jeddeloh etal., 1998; Zemach etal., 2013), was tested in the fourth generation of homozygosity and showed the strongest level of resistance amongst all genotypes tested (Figure1b). In contrast to the hypo-methylated mutants, the DNA glycosylase mutant ros1, which is hyper-methylated at all DNA sequence contexts (Gong etal., 2002; Zhu etal., 2007), was significantly more susceptible to Hpa than Col-0 plants (Figure1b). This enhanced susceptibility was similar to that of SA-insensitive npr1 plants (Cao etal., 1994; FigureS2a). The ros3 mutant, which is affected in an RNA-binding protein that interacts with ROS1 (Zheng etal., 2008), also showed enhanced susceptibility to Hpa (Figure1b), although this phenotype was not consistent over multiple experiments (FigureS2a). Conversely, all other mutants tested showed similar resistance phenotypes between independent experiments (FigureS2a). Together, these results point to opposite roles of DNA methylation and DNA demethylation in basal resistance to Hpa. Subsequent experiments focused on the hypo-methylated nrpe1 mutant and hyper-methylated ros1 mutant, whose Hpa resistance phenotypes were confirmed by qPCR quantification of oomycete biomass (FigureS2b).. . Figure 1. . Basal resistance to Hyaloperonospora arabidopsidis in Arabidopsis thaliana mutants that are affected in DNA (de)methylation.. (a) Growth phenotypes of tested Arabidopsis genotypes before infection. Genotypes correspond to those of the bars in (b) below each picture.. (b) Levels of basal resistance to H.arabidopsidis (Hpa) in DNA methylation mutants (ddm1 F4, nrpe1, drd1, and cmt3) and DNA demethylation mutants (ros3 and ros1). Six days after spray inoculation of 3-week-old plants (105 conidiospores ml-1), 200 leaves from 35 plants per genotype were microscopically assigned to different Hpa colonization classes following trypan blue staining. Shown are relative numbers of leaves assigned to different colonization classes. Inserts show representative levels of classes. Asterisks indicate statistically significant differences in class distributions compared to Col-0 (chi2 test; P<0.05).. . . . . . DNA methylation regulates effectiveness of callose deposition and SA-dependent PR1 gene induction upon Hpa infection. Reinforcement of the cell wall by deposition of callose-rich papillae contributes to slowing down pathogen colonization at relatively early stages of infection (Luna etal., 2011; Ellinger etal., 2013; Voigt, 2014). To determine the role of DNA (de)methylation in this induced defence layer against Hpa, we compared the effectiveness of callose deposition in relation to Hpa colonization between the wild-type Col-0, hypo-methylated nrpe1, and hyper-methylated ros1. To this end, leaves were collected at 48h post inoculation (hpi) for calcofluor/analine blue double staining and analysed by epifluorescence microscopy. To assess the defence-contributing activity of callose, all germinating spores were assigned to two mutually exclusive classes: (i) spores that were effectively arrested by callose and (ii) spores that were not arrested by callose. Using this classification, the ros1 mutant showed a statistically significant reduction in callose effectiveness in comparison to Col-0 plants (chi2; P<0.001; Figure2a). This indicates that the enhanced DNA methylation in this mutant represses the effectiveness of callose deposition.. . Figure 2. . Effectiveness and responsiveness of inducible defences against H.arabidopsidis in nrpe1, ros1 and Col-0.. (a) Effectiveness of callose deposition against Hpa infection at 48h after inoculation of 3-week-old plants (105 conidiospores ml-1). Defence phenotypes were determined by epifluorescence microscopy in at least 10 leaves per genotype, and assigned to two different classes based on presence or absence of successful penetration into the mesophyll by Hpa. Inserts on the right show an example of each class. Germinating Hpa spores appear in blue (calcofluor white-stained) and callose deposition is indicated by the presence of yellow staining (analine blue-stained). Asterisks indicate statistically significant differences in class distributions compared to Col-0 (chi2 test; P<0.05). Scale bars=100mum.. (b) RT-qPCR quantification of PR1 gene expression in Col-0, nrpe1 and ros1 at 48 and 72h after inoculation with Hpa or mock treatment. Data represent mean values of relative expression (SEM) from four biologically replicated samples. Asterisks indicate statistically significant differences in comparison to Col-0 (Student's t-test; P<0.05).. . . . In addition to cell wall defence, resistance to Hpa relies on post-invasive SA-dependent defences (Lawton etal., 1995; Thomma etal., 1998; Ton etal., 2002). To examine whether DNA (de)methylation affects SA-dependent defences, we quantified relative transcript accumulation of the SA-inducible PR1 marker gene at 48 and 72hpi with Hpa, using RT-qPCR (Figure2b). Consistent with previous results (Lpez etal., 2011), the more resistant nrpe1 mutant displayed a stronger induction of the PR1 gene, which was statistically significant at 48hpi with Hpa (P=0.026). Conversely, the more susceptible ros1 mutant showed repressed PR1 induction at 48hpi compared to Col-0 (P=0.028). As the nrpe1 mutant does not show constitutive expression of PR1 gene, we conclude that the DNA hypo-methylation in nrpe1 primes SA-dependent defence against Hpa, whereas DNA hyper-methylation in ros1 represses this type of defence.. . . Role of NRPE1- and ROS1-dependent DNA methylation in basal resistance against necrotrophic fungi. Lpez etal. (2011) demonstrated that mutants in RdDM display enhanced susceptibility to the necrotrophic fungus Plectosphaerella cucumerina, which is associated with repressed responsiveness of JA-dependent defence genes. To examine whether the increased level of DNA methylation in ros1 has an opposite effect on basal resistance to necrotrophic fungi, we compared 4.5-week Col-0, nrpe1 and ros1 for basal resistance against the Ascomycete fungus P.cucumerina. Basal resistance was quantified by necrotic lesion diameter, which is a reliable parameter to assess necrotrophic colonization by this fungus after droplet inoculation (Ton and Mauch-Mani, 2004; Ptriacq etal., 2016). At 6days post inoculation, the nrpe1 mutant developed larger lesions than Col-0 (Figures3a and S3a), confirming previous results by Lpez etal. (2011). Conversely, ros1 plants displayed significantly smaller necrotic lesions than Col-0 (Figures3a and S3a), indicating enhanced basal resistance to P.cucumerina. The disease phenotypes of nrpe1 and ros1 were validated by qPCR quantification of fungal DNA (FigureS3b), confirming that both mutants are oppositely affected in disease resistance to P.cucumerina. Furthermore, similar results were obtained by quantifying microscopic colonization by a different necrotrophic fungus, A.brassicicola (FigureS3c). It can thus be concluded that DNA hyper-methylation in the ros1 mutant boosts basal disease resistance to necrotrophic fungi.. . Figure 3. . Basal resistance to Plectosphaerella cucumerina and JA-induced gene expression in nrpe1, ros1 and Col-0.. (a) Levels of basal resistance to P.cucumerina. Shown are mean lesion diameters (SEM; 27 plants) at 6days after droplet inoculation of 4.5-week-old plants. Asterisks indicate statistically significant differences between Col-0 and mutant plants (Student's t-test; P<0.05).. (b) RT-qPCR quantification of PDF1.2 and VSP2 gene expression in Col-0, nrpe1 and ros1 at 0, 4, 8 and 24h after spraying with 0.1mm jasmonic acid (JA). Data represent mean values of relative expression (SEM; n=3). Asterisks indicate statistically significant differences in comparison to Col-0 samples (Student's t-test; P<0.05).. . . . Basal resistance against P.cucumerina and A.brassicicola partially relies on JA-dependent defences (Thomma etal., 1998, 1999; Ton and Mauch-Mani, 2004). To investigate whether the enhanced resistance of ros1 is based on increased sensitivity of JA-inducible defence gene expression, we analysed plants for PDF1.2 and VSP2 expression at 0, 4, 8 and 24h after spraying of the leaves with 50mm JA. Consistent with the earlier notion that mutations in RdDM repress defence gene responsiveness to JA (Lpez etal., 2011), the nrpe1 mutant showed significantly lower and/or delayed JA induction of both genes in comparison to wild-type plants (Figure3b). Surprisingly, despite the fact that the ros1 mutant was more resistant to both P.cucumerina and A.brassicicola (Figures3a and S3), it also showed repressed induction of PDF1.2 and VSP2 by JA, which was statistically significant at 4h post treatment with JA (Figure3b). Thus, increased resistance of ros1 to necrotrophic fungi is not based on primed responsiveness of JA-inducible gene expression.. . . ROS1-dependent demethylation does not play a role in within-generation SAR, but is required for TAR. Systemic acquired resistance is a pathogen-inducible form of acquired immunity that is expressed systemically (Durrant and Dong, 2004). Recently, it was shown that pathogen-induced acquired immunity can be transmitted to following generations in Arabidopsis (TAR; Slaughter etal., 2012; Luna etal., 2012). This resistance could be mimicked by genetic mutations in the DNA methylation machinery (Luna and Ton, 2012; Luna etal., 2012), suggesting that DNA demethylation is responsible for the generation and/or transmission of the response. To investigate the role of NRPE1- and ROS1-dependent DNA (de)methylation during within-generation SAR, three lower leaves of 4.5-week-old plants were infiltrated with avirulent Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato DC3000 carrying the avirulence gene avrRpm1 (Pst avrRpm1). Three days after SAR induction, systemic leaves were challenged with Hpa. As expected, SAR-treated Col-0 plants displayed a statistically significant reduction in Hpa colonization compared to control-treated plants (Figure4a). SAR in Pst avrRpm1-infected nrpe1 plants was borderline statistically significant (P=0.072), probably due to the masking effect of this mutant's elevated basal resistance (Figure1a). Notably, the ros1 mutant was fully capable of mounting a statistically significant SAR response against Hpa infection, indicating that ROS1-dependent DNA demethylation does not play a role in within-generation SAR.. . Figure 4. . Systemic acquired resistance (SAR) and transgenerational acquired resistance (TAR) in Col-0, nrpe1 and ros1.. (a) Quantification of within-generation SAR against Hpa. Four leaves of 4.5-week-old plants were infiltrated with either avirulent Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato DC3000 avrRpm1 (Pst avrRpm1) or 10mm MgSO4 (mock). Three days after SAR induction, plants were spray inoculated with Hpa (105conidiosporesml-1). At 6days after inoculation, 4-6 leaves from 15 plants per genotype were stained with trypan blue and microscopically assigned to different Hpa colonization classes (right panels). Asterisks indicate statistically significant differences in class distributions between SAR- and mock-treated plants (chi2 test; P<0.05).. (b) Quantification of TAR against Hpa in P1 and C1 progenies from Pst DC3000- and mock-inoculated plants, respectively. Parental plants were spray-inoculated three consecutive times at 3-4day intervals with Pst DC3000 or 10mm MgSO4 (mock), and allowed to set seed. Leaves of 3-week-old progenies were inoculated with Hpa (105conidiospores ml-1) and examined for pathogen colonization 6days later, as detailed in the legend of Figure1(a). Asterisks indicate statistically significant differences in class distributions between P1 and C1 progenies (chi2 test; P<0.05).. . . . We then investigated the role of NRPE1- and ROS1-dependent DNA (de)methylation in TAR. To this end, Col-0, nrpe1 and ros1 were inoculated three times with increasing doses of virulent Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato DC3000 (Pst DC3000) and allowed to set seed. Three-week-old F1 seedlings from Pst DC3000- (P1) and mock-treated (C1) parent plants were tested for resistance against Hpa (Figure4b). P1 progeny from Pst DC3000-infected Col-0 showed increased basal resistance in comparison to C1 progeny from mock-treated Col-0 (P=0.017). By contrast, there was no statistically significant difference in Hpa resistance between P1 and C1 progenies of nrpe1 (P=0.538). Levels of resistance in C1 progeny from nrpe1 were statistically similar to that of P1 progeny from Col-0 (P=0.148), which is consistent with the notion that reduced DNA methylation mimics TAR (Luna and Ton, 2012; Luna etal., 2012). Like the nrpe1 mutant, P1 and C1 progenies from ros1 did not show a difference in Hpa resistance (P=0.697). However, C1 progeny from ros1 displayed enhanced susceptibility in comparison to both P1 and C1 progeny of Col-0 (P<0.001), indicating that the lack of TAR in ros1 is due to this mutant's inability to transmit and/or express transgenerational acquired immunity.. . . NRPE1- and ROS1-dependent DNA (de-)methylation influences nearly half of the pathogenesis-related transcriptome. DNA methylation patterns are known to affect gene expression (Law and Jacobsen, 2010). Since nrpe1 and ros1 are antagonistically affected in both DNA methylation and responsiveness of PR1 expression during Hpa infection (Figure2b), we further explored global impacts of both mutations on the pathogenesis-related transcriptome of Hpa-infected Arabidopsis, using Affymetrix Gene 1.0 ST arrays. To account for transcriptomic responses during expression of penetration defence (48hpi) and post-invasive defence during hyphal colonization (72hpi), we isolated RNA from Col-0, nrpe1 and ros1 at 48 and 72hpi, respectively. First, we assessed the global impacts of mutations in NRPE1 and ROS1 by determining the number of differentially expressed genes between each mutant and Col-0 at any time-point and condition (q0.01). This analysis revealed that 1975 and 1150 genes are differentially expressed in the ros1 and nrpe1, respectively. By comparing these gene sets with the 967 genes that are differentially expressed in Col-0 between mock and Hpa-inoculated leaf samples (i.e. the Hpa-responsive genes), we found that 49% of all Hpa-responsive genes are affected by mutations in NRPE1 and/or ROS1 (477/967=49%; Figure5a). Hence, nearly half of the pathogenesis-related transcriptome of Arabidopsis is controlled directly or indirectly by NRPE1- and ROS1-dependent DNA (de)methylation.. . Figure 5. . The pathogenesis-related transcriptome of Col-0, nrpe1 and ros1 during infection by H.arabidopsidis.. (a) Venn diagram showing numbers of differentially expressed genes at 48 and/or 72h post inoculation (hpi) between mock- (m) and Hpa-inoculated (h) Col-0 (Hpa; green), between Col-0 and nrpe1 for any time-point and condition (nrpe1; blue), and between Col-0 and ros1 for any time-point and any condition (ros1; red). Each time-point (48 and 72hpi) was analysed separately; numbers represent the sum of differentially expressed genes at one or both time-points. Genes were considered to be differentially expressed at LIMMA-reported q-value 0.01 (global adjust, FDR).. (b) Hpa-inducible genes that show augmented induction in nrpe1 and/or repressed induction in ros1 are enriched with gene ontology (GO) terms Systemic Acquired Resistance (GO: 0009627) and Salicylic Acid Biosynthetic Process (GO: 0009697).. (c) Transcript levels of all 166 Hpa-inducible genes with augmented induction in nrpe1 and/or repressed induction in ros1. Genes were selected when differentially expressed between ros1 and nrpe1, as well as between Col-0 and ros1, and/or between Col-0 and nrpe1, at either time-point after inoculation. Heat map projections represent z-scores of transcript levels.. . . . . . Defence-related genes that are primed by DNA hypo-methylation and/or repressed by DNA hyper-methylation are strongly enriched with SA-dependent defence genes. The resistance phenotypes of nrpe1 and ros1 to Hpa can be caused by constant changes in defence gene expression, changes in defence gene responsiveness to pathogen attack, or a combination of both. Comparison of mock-inoculated nrpe1 and ros1 relative to Col-0 identified 1215 genes with enhanced expression in nrpe1 and/or repressed expression in ros1 at 48 and/or 72hpi (Figure5b). Of these, 256 genes were also Hpa-inducible in Col-0 plants (Figure5b). We then searched for defence-related genes with increased Hpa responsiveness in the more resistant nrpe1 mutant (i.e. primed) and/or repressed responsiveness in the more susceptible ros1 mutant. To this end, the group of 700 Hpa-inducible genes (shown in green; Figure5b) were filtered: (i) for a statistically significant difference between Hpa-inoculated nrpe1 and ros1 (48 and/or 72hpi; q0.01); and (ii) for a statistically significant difference between at least one of the Hpa-inoculated mutants and Hpa-inoculated Col-0 (48 and/or 72hpi; q0.01). As evidenced by a heat map projection of the gene expression profiles (Figures5c and S4), this filter identified 166 defence-related genes with primed Hpa responsiveness in nrpe1 and/or repressed Hpa responsiveness in ros1 (DataS1). Of these 166 genes, 46 were altered in Hpa responsiveness only, whereas 120 showed a combination of differential expression between mock-treated plants and differential responsiveness to Hpa (Figure5b). Interestingly, in comparison to all other gene sets, the genes displaying differential Hpa responsiveness showed the highest proportion of gene ontology (GO) terms Systemic Acquired Resistance and Salicylic Acid Biosynthetic Process (Figure5b). This outcome supports our notion that the resistance phenotypes of nrpe1 and ros1 are predominantly based on changes in defence gene responsiveness, rather than changes in constitutive gene expression.. . . The majority of ROS1- and/or NRPE1-controlled defence genes is not associated with ROS1- and/or NRPE1-dependent DNA methylation in their promoter regions. In subsequent analyses, we focused on the selection of 166 defence-related genes that are primed by DNA hypo-methylation and/or repressed by DNA hyper-methylation. First, we determined reproducibility of these microarray results by profiling transcript accumulation of four randomly selected genes in an independent experiment, using RT-qPCR. As is shown in FigureS5, all four genes showed reproducible expression profiles to the microarray experiment. Next, we examined whether the selection of 166 defence-related genes are regulated directly (in cis) or indirectly (in trans) by NRPE1 and ROS1-dependent DNA (de-)methylation. Because NRPE1 and ROS1 are known to control DNA methylation at or around transposable elements (TEs; Law and Jacobsen, 2010), we investigated whether the selection of 166 genes are enriched with nearby TEs. Using the TAIR10 annotation for known TEs, the 166 genes showed a weak enrichment of TEs within 2kb upstream of their transcriptional start, relative to a background of all other Arabidopsis genes on the microarray (Figure6a). By contrast, no TE enrichment was found for genic or 2kb-downstream regions of the 166 genes (Figure6a). We then examined whether the TE-enriched promoter regions are subject to NRPE1- or ROS1-dependent DNA (de-)methylation. To this end, we used publically available C-methylomes of nrpe1 and ros1 (Qian etal., 2012; Stroud etal., 2013) to create a combined C-methylome of sufficient sequence coverage (5 reads, 8363349 positions), before determining which of these positions are hypo-methylated in nrpe1 and/or hyper-methylated in ros1. From this list, we selected genes with at least three differentially methylated cytosines at the same context (CG, CHG or CHH) within their 2kb promoter region. Although the promoters of 166 defence-related genes were marginally enriched for NRPE1-dependent CHG and/or CHH methylation (Figure6b), this enrichment was not statistically significant in comparison to all other genes on the microarray (chi2 tests; P=0.3150 and 0.2837, respectively). Furthermore, the 166 gene promoters were not enriched for ROS1-dependent hypo-methylation. Together, this indicates that the majority of 166 defence genes are indirectly (trans-)regulated by NRPE1- and/or ROS1-dependent DNA (de)methylation.. . Figure 6. . Transposable element (TE) occurrence and DNA methylation features in 166 defence genes whose responsiveness is primed in nrpe1 and/or repressed in ros1.. (a) Relative TE occurrence in the selection of 166 genes compared to other genes considered in the transcriptome analysis (genes on array). For the 2kb upstream regions (5; relative to transcriptional start site) and the 2kb downstream regions (3; relative to poly-adenylation site), 100 windows of 20bp were used; for gene body regions, 100 windows of 1% of the gene length were used.. (b) Relative occurrence of differentially methylated cytosines (DmCs) in 2kb gene promoter regions of nrpe1 and ros1. Dark shades: DmC frequencies within the selection of 166 Hpa-responsive genes with augmented induction in nrpe1 and/or repressed induction in ros1 during Hpa infection. Light shades: DmC frequencies in all other genes considered in the transcriptome analysis. Shown are promoters with at least three differentially methylated DmCs in nrpe1 or ros1, relative to Col-0. Results are based on publically available bisulfite sequencing data of nrpe1 and ros1 (Qian etal., 2012; Stroud etal., 2013).. (c) Venn diagram representing a selection of the 166 gene promoters (2kb) that contain one or more TEs (green), have at least three hyper-methylated cytosines in the ros1 mutant (blue), and have at least three hypo-methylated cytosines in the nrpe1 mutant (red).. . . . . . Selection of 25 defence regulatory genes that are cis-regulated by NRPE1- and/or ROS1-dependent DNA (de-)methylation. To search for defence regulatory genes that are cis-regulated by NRPE1-/ROS1-dependent DNA (de)methylation, we analysed the 2kb gene promoter regions from the 166 NRPE1-/ROS1-controlled defence genes for: (i) TE presence; and (ii) occurrence of more than three hypo-methylated cytosines in nrpe1 and/or hyper-methylated cytosines in ros1. A total of 25 gene promoters met these criteria (Figure6c). To illustrate the DNA (de)methylation activities in these promoters, FigureS6 plots the positions of TEs and differentially methylated cytosines in nrpe1 and ros1. Furthermore, using data from a recent ChIP-sequencing study with a polyclonal antibody against native NRPE1 protein (Zhong etal., 2015), we show that physical binding of NRPE1 largely coincides with hypo-methylated regions in the nrpe1 mutant, thereby confirming localised activity by the Pol V complex. The group of 25 cis-regulated genes includes genes with annotated defence regulatory activity, such as genes encoding for pattern recognition receptors (PRRs), leucine-rich repeat (LRR) resistance proteins, CYP81D1 and DOWNY MILDEW RESISTANT 6 (TableS1), each of which has the potential to control a larger set of defence genes..
