Results. . Selection of T-DNA Mutant Lines for Gravitropism Assay. To analyze the role of myosins in gravity response of the inflorescence stems of Arabidopsis, we performed a gravitropism assay on myosin single, double, triple, and quadruple mutant lines. First, we analyzed myosin mRNA content of each homozygous T-DNA mutant line by reverse transcription followed by real-time PCR (RT-qPCR). Only single mutant lines where RT-qPCR showed the most down-regulation of expression were selected for gravitropism assay: viii1(1), viii2, viiia(1), viiib(1), xi1(1), xi2(1), xia, xib, xic, xid, xif, xig, xih, xii, xij, and xik(1). The only exception was xie for which no downregulated allele was found (Figure 1). Because double mutants xi1 xi2, xi1 xik, xi2 xik, xih xik, triple mutants xi1 xi2 xik and xi2 xik xih and quadruple mutant viii1 viii2 viiia viiib were made previously using different single mutant lines, the expression levels of myosins in these lines were also measured and confirmed to be reduced in mutants viii1, viiib, and xik and increased in xi1 and xi2 (Figure 1).. . FIGURE 1. . Myosin mRNA levels in T-DNA mutant lines used in this study. RT-qPCR analysis of myosin mRNA levels in myosin T-DNA mutants relative to wild type (wt) control (set to 1). Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals (CI), n = 3-6; p < 0.001.. . . . . . Stem Gravitropism is Altered in Myosin XI1, XI2, and XIK Deficient Plants. For gravitropism assay, inflorescence stems were placed horizontally and gravitropic response was characterized by gravitropic curvature and relative average speed. All stems of single mutants, double mutants, triple mutant xi2 xik xih and quadruple mutant viii1 viii2 viiia viiib bent up to the same extent as wild type stems (Figures 2A-G and data not shown) and at an average speed comparable to that of wild type (Figure 3). The gravitropic response of xi1 xi2 xik was dramatically different resulting in delay of bending and shallower curvature compared to wild type (Figures 2H,I). While stems of wild type started to curve up within 30 min, continued bending and reached near vertical steady state, the stems of xi1 xi2 xik started to curve up only within 130 min and did not reach the maximum curvature value of the wild type even after 10 h of gravistimulation (Figure 2H). The average translocation speed in triple mutant was fourfold less than that in the wild type (Figure 3B). These results showed clearly that class XI but not class VIII myosins are required for stem gravitropism.. . FIGURE 2. . Gravitropic response of 5-week-old Arabidopsis inflorescence stems during 10 h of gravistimulation. (A-H) Time course of gravitropic responses of wild type (wt) and (A-C) single, (D-F) double, (G) quadruple, and (H) triple mutants. Error bars represent SD, n = 6-20. (I) Gravitropic phenotype of wild type and xi1 xi2 xik. Overlay of 600 images taken with 1 min intervals. min indicates the time point when subsiding of the stem tips changes to ascension, max shows the highest point of gravitropic curvature. Time between min and max was the basis for calculation of average speed. Scale bar 10 mm.. . . . . FIGURE 3. . Average speed of inflorescence stems tip movements during gravistimulation. (A) Relative average speed of inflorescence stems of myosin single mutants and (B) double, triple, and quadruple mutants. Average speed is expressed as a percentage of wild type average speed (set to 100%). For every mutant line individual experiment was done together with wild type control. Error bars represent 95% CI, n = 21; p < 0.001 (Students t-test).. . . . The expression of myosins in wild type inflorescence stems gravistimulated for 4 h compared to non-gravistimulated wild type stems was also analyzed. Figure 4 shows that there is no difference in the expression of myosins during gravistimulation relative to the control, indicating that myosins are not transcriptionally regulated by gravitropic bending.. . FIGURE 4. . Myosin mRNA levels after 4 h of gravistimulation. RT-qPCR analysis of myosin mRNA levels in gravistimulated wild type plants relative to unstimulated control (set to 1). Error bars represent 95% CI, n = 12.. . . . . . xi1 xi2 xik Exhibits Reduced Growth Rate and More Rigid Inflorescence Stem. Delayed and insufficient gravitropic response of xi1 xi2 xik implied that the physical features of the stem might be impaired. For analysis of stem morphology, we made cross sections and longitudinal sections of the stems gravisensitive region and found that radial cell organization of triple mutant was not different from that of the wild type. Inflorescence stems had one epidermal cell layer, three or four cortex layers, and one endodermal cell layer (Figure 5).. . FIGURE 5. . Morphology of wild type and xi1 xi2 xik gravisensitive region. (A) Cross-sections of inflorescence stems. (B) Longitudinal sections of inflorescence stems. Toluidine blue staining. Ep, epidermis; Co, cortex; En, endodermis; Ph, phloem; Xy, xylem; If, interfascicular fiber. Scale bars 50 mum.. . . . As gravitropism requires organ growth and triple mutant has been shown to have shorter inflorescence stems than wild type (Peremyslov et al., 2010; Ojangu et al., 2012), we measured the elongation rates of stems during our 10-h gravitropism experiments and found it to be about 50% of that of wild type in triple mutant (Figure 6A). Next we performed flexure test for measuring stiffness of gravisensitive region. In flexure test we calculated flexural modulus of elasticity which shows the stiffness of the stems at the load applied. Compared to the wild type, xi1 xi2 xik had a 28% increase in bending stiffness and slightly reduced diameter (Figures 6B,C). These results suggest that myosins XI1, XI2, and XIK play a role in growth and rigidity formation of the inflorescence stem that likely affect gravitropic bending.. . FIGURE 6. . Physical properties of wild type and xi1 xi2 xik inflorescence stems. (A) Growth rates of inflorescence stems during 10-h gravitropism. Error bars represent SD, n = 9; p < 0.05 (Students t-test). (B) Tendency for stems to bend in gravisensitive region according to flexure test. Higher flexural modulus of triple mutant shows greater stiffness of the stem. (C) Diameters of the same stems assayed in flexure test. Error bars represent SD, n = 35-45; p < 0.05; p < 0.01 (Students t-test).. . . . . . Organization of Actin Filaments in xi1 xi2 xik Endodermal Cells is Not Altered. It is known that epidermal cells of triple mutant xi1 xi2 xik have alterations in the architecture of actin filaments (Peremyslov et al., 2010; Ueda et al., 2010; Cai et al., 2014). Therefore we analyzed F-actin organization in living endodermal cells expressing GFP-fABD-GFP (actin-binding domain 2 from Arabidopsis fimbrin 1) F-actin marker in the wild type and xi1 xi2 xik stems. Confocal microscopy revealed extensive network of actin filament bundles in both wild type and triple mutant endodermal cells without any apparent differences in their organization (Figure 7A). To analyze F-actin organization quantitatively, we measured average angles against the longitudinal axis of the cell and parallelness relative to each other by methods described by Ueda et al. (2010). The results of quantification confirmed that there was no significant difference between the average angles and parallelness (p = 0.4 and p = 0.9, respectively) of GFP-fABD-GFP-labeled actin filaments of triple mutant and wild type (Figures 7B,C).. . FIGURE 7. . Organization of actin filaments in living endodermal cells. (A) GFP-fABD-GFP-labeled actin filaments in wild type (wt) and xi1 xi2 xik endodermal cells. (B) Average angle of actin filaments with respect to longitudinal axis of the cell. (C) Parallelness of actin filaments with respect to each other. Error bars represent SD, n = 28-29. Scale bar 20 mum.. . . . . . Sedimentation of Amyloplasts in xi1 xi2 xik Is Impaired. We then analyzed the localization of amyloplasts in endodermal cells. Stem segments from gravisensitive region were fixed with the direction of gravity maintained constant, sectioned longitudinally and stained with IKI solution. Amyloplasts stained intensely both in wild type and xi1 xi2 xik genetic backgrounds indicating that there is no significant difference in the level of starch in amyloplasts. All amyloplasts in wild type and triple mutant control stems located at the bottom side of the cell (Figure 8A). Next, we investigated the sedimentation of amyloplasts in the direction of a new gravity vector. Inflorescence stems were gravistimulated for 10, 20, and 40 min by turning stems upside down. After 10 min of reorientation, amyloplasts in wild type stems were localized all over endodermal cell, some of them settling toward the new bottom (Figure 8B). Amyloplasts sedimented fully at the bottom of new basal end within 20 min (Figure 8C). In contrast, no movement of xi1 xi2 xik amyloplasts occurred during the first 10 min of reorientation (Figure 8B). First signs of sedimentation were visible by the end of 20 min but most of the amyloplasts still remained in their initial positions (Figure 8C) relocating to the new basal end only within 40 min (Figure 8D). These results demonstrate that myosins XI1, XI2, and XIK are also required for the proper sedimentation of amyloplasts.. . FIGURE 8. . Amyloplast distribution in endodermal cells. (A) Localization of amyloplasts in the stems of control plants. (B-D) Inflorescence stems were reoriented 180 and gravistimulated for (B) 10, (C) 20, or (D) 40 min. The arrow indicates direction of gravity (g). Scale bar 20 mum.. . . . . . Gravitropic Response of the xi1 xi2 xik Is Rescued by the Expression of YFP-Tagged Myosin XIK. Despite of the general functional redundancy of the highly expressed myosins XI, it is known that the myosin XIK plays principal roles in such myosin-dependent processes as intracellular trafficking, cell expansion and plant growth (Ojangu et al., 2007, 2012; Peremyslov et al., 2008, 2010, 2012; Avisar et al., 2012; Park and Nebenfhr, 2013). Accordingly, we attempted to address this myosins contribution to gravitropism using inflorescence stems of xi1 xi2 xik triple mutant stably transformed to express a genomic copy of the myosin XIK gene tagged with YFP (Peremyslov et al., 2012). Strikingly, the stems of plants with the xi1 xi2 xik XIK:YFP genetic background exhibited normal gravitropic response. There was no delay in the gravitropic response of transgenic stems and the curvature was comparable to that of the wild type (Figure 9A). Furthermore, the relative average speed of stem movement increased from 26% of that in the wild type in the xi1 xi2 xik, to 86% in the xi1 xi2 xik XIK:YFP (Figure 9B) being not significantly different from that of the wild type (p = 0.5). We then investigated the sedimentation of amyloplasts in xi1 xi2 xik XIK:YFP, inverting the stems upside down similarly to xi1 xi2 xik (Figure 8). It was found that translocation of amyloplasts was improved-although 10 min after reorientation amyloplasts in xi1 xi2 xik XIK:YFP did not move at the same extent as in wild type, the translocation was massive after 20 min (Figure 9C). Thus, the expression of XIK:YFP resulted in genetic rescue of the triple mutant gravitropic bending and amyloplast sedimentation.. . FIGURE 9. . Effect of YFP-tagged myosin XIK on xi1 xi2 xik gravitropism. (A) Time course of gravitropic response and (B) relative average tip movement speed of wild type (wt) and xi1 xi2 xik XIK:YFP inflorescence stems. Average speed is expressed as a percentage of wild type average speed (set to 100%). Error bars represent SD, n = 7. (C) Localization of amyloplasts in xi1 xi2 xik XIK:YFP control stems and in 180 reoriented stems gravistimulated for 10, 20, or 40 min. The arrow indicates direction of gravity (g). Scale bar 20 mum..
