"The ptr3-1 mutant has reduced resistance to Erwinia carotovora subsp. carotovora, a virulent necrotrophic pathogen and to Pseudomonas syringae  pv. tomato, a hemibiotrophic pathogen. But, this mutant is not more susceptible to the virulent necrotrophic pathogen Xanthomonas campestris pv. campestris or to the avirulent necrotrophic pathogen Alternaria brassicicola. There is no significant difference in the glucosinolate or camalexin content of MeJA-treated ptr3-1 and wild type plants.
10% reduccion in elongation activity of [1-14C]8:0 into both C16 and C18 FAs when compared to wild-type. Elongation with [1-14C]12:0 substrate was reduced 20%. 40% reduction of in vitro acyl-ACP synthase activity.
11% of mutant pollen grains germinated compared to 97% for wild type.
12% of seedlings have cotyledons partially fused along one side (heart-shaped cotyledons).
12h after imbibition, the decrease in ABA content in the mutant seeds was much slower than that of wild type (<i>ca.</i> 70%).
18% reduction in lutein and accumulates &#945;-cryptoxanthin and &#945;-carotene. The latter was shown to be almost exclusively localized in photosystems.
20% decrease in pectin methylesterase activity compared to wild-type.
20% less total carotenoids on a fresh weight basis compared to wildtype.
22.9% (72 of 314) of seedlings produced lightgreen, somatic embryos  at the tip margin of  cotyledons. Eight percent (25 of 314) of seedlings were equipped with ectopic trichomes on the  cotyledons.  Elongation of roots and emergence of root  hairs in AtEMKox-2 were severely inhibited in comparison  to WT. Furthermore,  the roots of AtEMKox-2 showed aberrant structures  such as tumescence of cells and entwined root hairs. In spite of the abnormal shape of roots, the root  apical meristem of AtEMKox-2 was morphologically  identical to WT.
22% reduction in maltotriose production.
23% reduction in maltose production.
25% of seeds in developing silique of heterozygous plants are albino and lethal; mature mutant and wild type seeds look identical; but 25% of the developing seedlings are albino, fail to mature beyond the cotyledon stage and do not accumulate any chlorophyll pigments. Mutant growth not rescued with exogenous addition of metabolically related amino acids. Significant alteration in the amino acid profiles of most plant tissue types, increased seed Threonine (Thr) content; reduced Glicyn (a product of Thr aldolase reaction) content in all plant tissues; increased branched-chain amino acids (Ile, Leu and Val) in vegetative tissues, except in stems, where there is a decrease. Reduced levels of organic acids and sugars, citrate and isocitrate levels in seeds and flowers are significantly lower than in wild type; levels of most sugars are significantly decreased in flowers and siliques.
29?C-grown vcs apices contained multiple clusters of small densely staining cells dispersed across the apical region and often in close proximity to leaf-like structures, but no  typical SAM.
2 fold reduction in miR156, 159, 162, 166, 167, and 319) were reduced by ?2-fold in xct-2 relative to wild-type.miR822 is also reduced.
30% smaller in leaf dimater and 37% shorter than single mutant ga3ox1-3.
30-40% T3 seeds are embryo lethal, the rest had delayed germination. Among the germinated plants, they displayed a range of phenotypic expression: 1) seedling lethal, 2) normal cotyledons later became elongated and fragile, slightly narrower and curved rosette leaves, reduced shoot apical dominancy, elongated internode, shorter primary roots and long lateral roots, shorter siliques, 3) very subtle changes
30-50% of embryos display abnormal apical development.  Some cells in 4-cell to 16-cell stage embryos fail to divide. From the 16-cell stage on, embryos additionally showed aberrant oblique cell divisions not observed in the wild type. At the mid-globular stage, embryos started to recover by forming a protoderm and eventually gave rise to fertile plants.
30 from a total of 40 seedlings (75%) developed at least one leaf 8 days after germination and all double mutant progeny developed leaves by day 20. In 19 stm-1 trn2-23010 double mutant seedlings, leaves initiated from the base of the cotyledons, which were always fused due to lack of early STM activity. In the remaining 21 double mutant progeny single leaves or side shoots arose laterally, from the outside of the fused base of the petioles instead of being initiated from the shoot apex and thus resembled stm-1 mutant side shoots which are initiated after a long delay.
35% reduction in maltose production.
3-day-old seedlings still showed disorganized cell layers and no leaf primordia.
40% reduction in the thylakoid content as compared with WT, pale green leaves of the taac mutant.
50% of the mitotic nuclei in anaphase from tert mutants with severe growth defects (in the G8 generation) have anaphase bridges, while none are found in comparable wild type controls. These anaphase bridges occur disproportionately often between rDNA regions. A number of chromosomal defects can also be visualized during metaphase in these mutants. About 30% of the leaf mesophyll cells examined in tert G8 mutants have elevated numbers of nucleoli.
62% reduction in maltotriose production.
70% of the WT level of PSI-H is still present in mutant plants.
72% reduction in maltose production.
80% of wild type height at maturity. Leaves and petioles are shorter than wild type.
96% reduction in maltotriose production.
A 2-h pulse of cisplatin  at increasing concentrations was found to restore  bivalent formation in Atspo11-1-3 meiocytes.
aba4-1 npq1 underwent a significant reduction in leaf chlorophyll content and a strong accumulation of the antioxidant molecule tocopherol with respect to npq1 aba4-1 npq1 was photoinhibited further and had only recovered to similar levels as the other genotypes after 6 d decrease of the chlorophyll/carotenoid ratio and an increase in tocopherol content
ABA and Ca(2+) activation of slow-type anion channels and ABA activation of plasma membrane Ca(2+)-permeable channels were impaired in independent alleles of single and double cpk3cpk6 mutant guard cells. Furthermore, ABA- and Ca(2+)-induced stomatal closing were partially impaired in these cpk3cpk6 mutant alleles. However, rapid-type anion channel current activity was not affected, consistent with the partial stomatal closing response in double mutants via a proposed branched signaling network. Imposed Ca(2+) oscillation experiments revealed that Ca(2+)-reactive stomatal closure was reduced in CDPK double mutant plants. However, long-lasting Ca(2+)-programmed stomatal closure was not impaired.
ABA fails to induce significant nitric acid (NO) production in the guard cells of this double mutant.
ABA hypersensitive, grows poorly in the presence of ABA.
ABA hypersensitivity for germination, sugar hypersensitivity for establishment, prolonged after-ripening and reduced breakdown of stored lipid following germination.
ABA-inhibition of stomatal opening reduced.
ABA inhibits stomatal opening in nia1 nia2 as in the wild type, revealing that not all stomatal responses to ABA are reduced.
ABA-insensitive phenotype
ABA levels in dry seeds are 20-fold higher compared to those in wild type.
ABA levels in dry seeds are 50-fold higher compared to those in wild type.
ABA levels in dry seeds are 5-fold higher compared to those in wild type.
ABA levels showed light dependence in the mutant.
ABA-regulated seed germination was unaffected under the experimental conditions used.
aberrant division pattern
Aberrant embryo cells that contain larger oilbodies compared to the WT. Unlike KnockOLEO1, oilbodies were rather uniform in size.
Aberrant leaf development. Elongated petioles in both rosette and cauline leaves. Narrow leaves. Serrated rosette and cauline leaves. Curled leaves. Late flowering.
aberrant root hair morphology
aberrant seed shape (heart-shaped vs. oblong), exhibits reduced dormancy.
abi3-3 plants exhibited severe seed-specific developmental defects, namely reduced dormancy and severely reduced accumulation of seed reserve proteins. The embryos remained green throughout development and were desiccation intolerant. However, immature seeds were completely non-dormant and grow normally. The morphological development of abi3-3 embryos does not appear to differ from wild-type, and if imbibed 10 DAF the seeds germinate to produce normal looking plantlets. However, if the embryos are left to desiccate they do not germinate. It appears that AB13 gene product is not essential for morphogenetic development of the embryo, but is required for protection of the embryo prior to desiccation.
abnormal bending of embryos, ectopic adhesion between cotyledons, a highly permeable epidermal structure, and an abnormal pattern of distribution of stomata on cotyledons in embryos and seedlings
Abnormal cell division observable from the globular embryo stage onwards. Approximately half of homozygous drn-1 embryos show abnormal development in the hypophysis region, or no obvious distinction between embryo proper and suspensor.
Abnormal cotyledon vascular pattern. Slow-growing. Leaves are shorter and narrower than WT. Increased number of petals. Petals are curled downward. Fewer stamens. Short siliques containing fewer seeds than WT.
Abnormal flower (fusion of two or three flowers, because it consisted of more sepals, petals, stamens and carpels than a wild-type flower) at the apex of primary inflorescence after developing a few lateral flowers which appeared to be morphologically normal.
Abnormal flower development, serrated leaves.  Flowers have narrow sepals and petals. Floral organs emerge from within siliques. Reduced fertility. Seeds are viviparous.Abnormal cell divisions early in embryogenesis result in delayed and asynchronous development.
abnormal germination rates and seed morphology, faster growth rate and development, reduced fertility due to defects in anther dehiscence and fewer pollen, altered flavonoid metabolism compared to wild type
abnormal gravitropic response
Abnormal gravitropism in inflorescence stems and hypocotyls. Some mutant seeds were shrunken and did not germinate. Although most seedlings were normal, some had abnormal shape, ofthen with one or three cotyledons.
Abnormalities in cell morphology in lcr-3P77: These were very often observed as bulges consisting of several cells and as abnormally large roundish cells. The development of trichomes was also found to be affected in a way that suggested that cell differentiation was retarded in lcr-3P77 compared with wild-type plants.
Abnormalities in size and shape of chloroplasts in mesophyll cells compared to wild type. Chloroplast division is aberrant.
Abnormal leaf shape and size, fused organs, abnormal cuticle with increased wax layers, increased wax content,reduced trichome numbers.
Abnormal leaf shape and size.
Abnormal leaf shape- semidominant.
Abnormal leaf venation. Increased number of veins end freely rather than in loops.
Abnormal leaf venation. Reduced number of leaf veins.
Abnormal leaves, pin-like or 'lotus-like'.
Abnormal leaves. Leaves are pin-like or 'lotus'-like.
Abnormal pattern of leaf veneation. Veins are discontinous in cotyledons although the overall architeture of venation is not affected.
Abnormal peroxisome morphology as observed in mutants that contain a peroxisome marker (YFP?PTS1). Aberrant peroxisome division. Slow growth.
Abnormal pin-shaped (narrow) leaves, chlorosis, seedling lethal at 22C.
Abnormal pollen development associated with asymmetric microspore division.
Abnormal root growth on NaCl free media.
Abnormal root hair tip growth.Root hairs are short and branched.
Abnormal roots. Roots are shorted and have fewer root hairs (ca. 20% less than wild type). Root epidermal cells have abnormal morphology and bulge.
abnormal segregation of the mutant allele in xri1+/- plants; xri- pollen nonviable; homozygous xri1 mutants sterile due to extensive chromosome fragmentation visible in meiocytes.
Abnormal trichome morphology  with increased branches.
Abolished stretch-activate mechanosensitive channel activity
Aborted pollen occasionally observed.  Anther size and number of pollen grains obviously reduced. Tapetum does not develop normally.
Aborted trichomes on the first leaf pair, increase in trichome clusters, and decrease in the apparent trichome cell size.
Aborted vascular system containing few protoxylem cells in the primary root. Normal adventitious root-vascular system.
Abortion of the first 3-4 basal siliques. However, other non-aborting siliques are similar to those of wildtype.
About 2% of all trichomes had more than one nucleus. Among the cluster-like trichomes, 93% had several nuclei, whereas 0.4% of the trichomes with a normal appearance had more than one nucleus.
About 51% of stm-5 trn2-23010 double mutant seedlings produced leaves by 8 days after germination, compared to only 3% in the stm-5 single mutant. In contrast to combination with stm-1, leaves of stm-5 trn2-23010 double mutants never initiated from outside the base of the cotyledon petioles but emerged internally to the cotyledons where the SAM normally resides in wild type.
About 60% of the trichomes are two-branched.
About half of the rosette leaves are epinastic, the remaining half was hyponastic.
About nine-tenths of the mutants exhibited abaxialized vasculature. The exclusively adaxialized vasculature observed in kan1 kan2 petioles was not detected in bop1 bop2 kan1 kan2 petioles. The radialized portion of bop1 bop2 kan1 kan2 leaves showed various kinds of organ polarity defects. The vascular bundles of nearly half of the leaves (44.0%) consisted of phloem surrounded by xylem, while one-third (36.0%) displayed xylem surrounded by phloem, and a small percentage (16.0%) had a mixture of both types of vasculature.
abscisic acid deficient, reduced level of endogenous ABA during various stages of plant and seed development, but relatively higher ABA content than other aba mutants; impaired in ABA biosynthesis, blocking the conversion of ABA-aldehyde to ABA; increased leaf transpiration rate, but relatively low rate of water loss than other aba mutants, which leads to a slightly wilty phenotype especially under low relative humidity and water stress; wilty phenotype can be restored to normal by spraying an ABA solution to the plants; reduced seed dormancy, fresh seeds germinate at high frequency, germinate in silique on plant at high relative humidity; decreased sensitivity to the presence of GA biosynthesis inhibitors such as paclobutrazol; reduced sensitivity to salt and osmotic stress during germination.
abscisic acid resistant, reduced sensitivity to ABA inhibition of germination, germinates in the presence of 3 microM ABA; does not exhibit compromised water relations, normal stomatal regulation, not wilty phenotype; seed dormancy similar to wt; reduced sensitivity to salt and osmotic stress during germination.
Abscisic acid resistant, strong allele, reduced sensitivity to ABA inhibition of germination, germination of seeds only slightly inhibited by 1mM ABA;  normal plant growth;  seeds fail to degrade chlorophyl during maturation keeping seeds green until maturity;  absence of seed dormancy; reduced seed desiccation tolerance; reduced  seed longevity;  seeds lose their viability within 5 weeks of storage at room temperature.
Abscisic acid resistant, strong allele, reduced sensitivity to ABA inhibition of germination, germination of seeds only slightly inhibited by 1mM ABA; normal plant growth; seeds fail to degrade chlorophyll during maturation keeping seeds green until mature.
Absence of ABA-induced inhibition of seed germination.
Absence of induced systemic resistance response (ISR) to WCS417r rhizobacteria. Systemic acquired resistance (SAR) is not affected.
Absence of lateral roots. Defective response to auxin stimulus in the root.
Absence of periclinal cell divisions in the primary root meristem.
absence of roots and defective development of the vasculature.
Absence of seed dormancy.  But still require light-induced gibberellic acid (GA) biosynthesis to overcome inhibition by abscisic acid (ABA).
Absence of starch and accumulation of very high levels of water-soluble glucans.
Accelerated flowering by 2 weeks vernalization.  Flowering time variation between accessions  was maximal after 4 wk vernalization.
Accelerated heteroblasty. Leaves have increased number of cells and decreased cell size in leaves at higher nodes.
Accelerated progression of cell death upon infiltration of leaf with a PCD-inducing fungal toxin FB1 and increased sensitivity to heat-shock-induced cell death.
Accelerated senescence under constant dark conditions.
According to one report, this T-DNA insertion causes lethality and the authors could not recover homozygous mutants from a heterozygous parent.
ACC-triggered dark-grown apical hook formation is compromised in this mutant. Root meristematic cells differentiate in this mutant, leading to a loss of the stem cell niche and the cessation of root growth. This mutant also lacks valves in the gynoecia.
accumulate decreased levels of several different classes of phenylpropanoid end-products and exhibit reduced lignin deposition and altered lignin monomer content; accumulate a novel hydroxycinnamic ester, cinnamoylmalate, which is not found in the wild type; pleiotropic phenotypes includ dwarfism, male sterility, and the development of swellings at branch junctions.
Accumulated less chlorophyll than wild-type.  Smaller and more compact rosettes than wild-type. More lanceolate cauline leaves.  Less fertile.  Under short day conditions, the double mutant develops a less branched primary inflorescence.
Accumulated zeinoxanthin but, unlike lut1-1 and lut1-2, lacks lutein.
Accumulate nuclear poly(A+) RNA.
Accumulates &#945;-carotene and zeinoxanthin at levels nearly identical to lut5-1 and lut1-4 single mutants, respectively.
Accumulates ABA to 10-fold higher levels than wild type.
Accumulates ABA to 7-fold higher levels than wild type.
Accumulates extra ectopic tracheary elements within their cotyledons and the upper hypocotyl.
Accumulates protochlorophyllide in dark.  Upon illumination produces excited singlet oxygen and developes necrotic lesions.
Accumulates reduced amounts of starch relative to wildtype but large amounts of soluble glucan.
Accumulate the same levels of chlorophyll as gun4-1.
Accumulate the same levels of chlorophyll as gun5-1.
Accumulation of Cu in both roots and shoots of mutant when grown on medium containing 10 &#956;M Cu.
Accumulation of intermediate zeinoxanthin and contains 8% of wild type lutein. Leaky mutation.
Accumulation of red chlorophyll catabolites (RCC) and RCC-like compounds during senescence.
Activation tagged allele of STIP. Ectopic/overexpression of homeobox gene results in abnormal leaf shape, loss of apcial dominance, and reduced fertility due to abnormal ovule and flower development.
Activity of SUS was reduced by about one-third in roots of the double mutant relative to Col-0, but otherwise the mutant was indistinguishable from Col-0.
Adaxial epidermal cells have a slightly irregular edge, indicating a partial adoption of leaf fate.
Adaxial surface of first whorl organs are unaffected.
Additional columella root cap and lateral root cap cell layers in the mature embryo and postembryonic root development. Root meristem length and cell number is similar to WT. Extra layer of small, stem-cell-like cells, below the columella and lateral root cap stem cells.
Addition of cytokinin promotes extensive shoot induction in mutant but not in WT calli.
Addition of IAA results in the formation of laterals from the primary root as is the case for wildtype. Both the laterals and primary root show retarded growth and reduced amounts of vascular tissue. Similar phenotypes were obtained with NAA instead of IAA.
Addition of IAA to the medium completely inhibits root elongation, indicating normal auxin responsiveness.
Additive phenotype. The number of second-whorl organs was reduced in lug-1 rbe-3 double mutants and these remaining organs were primarily staminoid. Thus, rbe-3 enhanced the second-whorl phenotype of lug-1 mutants. The double mutant rarely produced any seeds, suggesting a more severe defect in female fertility in the double mutant compared with either single mutant. However, no enhancement of the outer integument growth defect was observed.
Additive phenotype in the first and fourth whorls. Second-whorl organs of the double mutant were more completely converted to stamens or were missing entirely.
Additive phenotype resulting in trichomes with up to 11 branch points.
Additive with respect to both single mutants. short internodes, down-ward orientation of siliques and organ clusters. Increased branching. Fruit defects.
A decrease in 18:3 content was observed in the mutant seeds, but it is much less than the decrease in 18:1-OH + 18:2-OH.
A detailed analysis of the rol1-2 mutants show aberrant cotyledon development with an uneven  surface and hyponastic growth, aberrant pavement cell and stomatal morphology in cotyledons, and defective trichome formation. Further the typical jigsaw puzzle?like cell shape of pavement cells was absent in rol1-2 mutants.
ADH activity is stronger in early-maturing mutant embryos than in wildtype.
Adult homozygous tgh mutant plants have a reduced stature and significantly smaller lanceolate leaves. Anthers failed to elongate and produce pollen. Almost complete infertility. At the seedling stage, tgh mutant seedlings are recognizable by developmental defects, including triple cotyledons, altered cotyledon shape, and reduced elongation growth in dark-grown seedlings. The triple cotyledon phenotype is,  however, not fully penetrant (e.g., only 7 of 362 progeny seedlings of a TGH/tgh-1 parent line displayed the triple cotyledon phenotype corresponding to a penetrance of 7.7%). tgh mutants have an imperfect vascular system  with differentiated but frequently unconnected vascular strands, which is cuased by a defect in the initiation of vascular development.
Adult mutant plants display a virescent phenotype: young leaves and recently expanded tissues are pale whereas mature tissues are as green as wildtype.
Adult mutant plants were three to four times smaller than single mutant, sab plants. Roots of double mutant were shorter than roots of sab mutant. Radial organization of the root was similar to the roots of sab mutant. Root hairs were thicker that in wild type or sab mutant. Pollen grains from double mutant plants rarely germinated in vitro, and when they did, the pollen tubes were shorter and twisted.
Adult plant morphologically normal. Reduced transmission through male gametophyte. More than half of pollen grains are defective having abnormal vacuolar development. Pollen germination and pollen tube growth is also affected.
Adult plants wilt under dessicating conditions.
Adventitious roots are normal.
Aerial parts of the mutants plants were smaller than wild type, with normal morphology; homozygous plants had extremely low fertility even though flowers were formed. Root-specific phenotype, identified due to the increased root diameter. Cell expansion greatest in the cortex cells; expansion primarily in radial orientation.
A few external ovules develop at the base of the gynoecium and straps of ectopic style from along the abaxial replum. Phenotype is present primarily in the first formed carpels.
After 12 wk vernalization FLC levels increased after 30 d growth post-cold.
After 21 days of growth, the mutant leaves started to develop epinasty. The petioles were shorter and accumulated more anthocyanins. Unlike many other mutants in JA signaling, fou2 mutants does not have altered sensitivity to methyl-JA.
After 2 d in continuous light, the total aerial biomass accumulated by the mutant was 40% higher than the wild type. In normal photoperiod and continuous light, both the wild type and mutants developed to the reproductive stage synchronically, but in darkness the mutant plants showed a delay of about 2 to 3 d to reach the flowering phase.
After 4 days at 31?C, root hairs emerge in the region that would formerly have been the meristem.
After 4 wk vernalization, FLC levels had increased (by 30 d after transfer to 23?C) to the same level as nonvernalized plants.
After 4 wk vernalization, the repression of FLC expression was maintained.
After 5 days growth under far-red light, the double mutant showed the same elongated hypocotyl phenotype as the loss-of-function allele phyA-211.
After 6 wk of cold, FLC levels were lower than those observed at 4 wk.
After 6 wk vernalization, Lov-1 flowered earlier than Ull-2-5, suggesting that Lov-1 might be insensitive to short periods of cold but then respond quickly after that.
After A. brassicicola infection, increased disease symptoms and pathogen growth are observed when compared to wild type.
After bolting, the wilty phenotype became evident in the shoot apex, cauline leaves and immature siliques of this mutant. This phenotype was partially restored by application of 10 &mu;M ABA to rosette leaves.
After spraying mutant plants with Botrytis spores, disease symptoms increase rapidly, showing chlorosis, necrosis, and complete plant decay compared with wild type plants.
After transfer from 10 mM to 0.5 mM NO3-, the stimulated appearance of LRs was abolished in atnrt2.1-1 plants, while the increase in mean lateral root length was much more pronounced than in Ws.
A higher proportion of the MPK12 protein isolated from ibr5-3 mutants is dually phosphorylated. The MPK12 protein isolated from ibr5-3 mutants also has higher activity than the MPK12 protein isolated from wild type plants.
Albino cotyledons, abnormal chloroplast biogenesis.  True leaves are not affected, chloroplast development during embryo biogenesis is not affected.  Affected in photomorphogenesis after prolonged skotomorphogenesis (after 4 days in dark unable to undergo photomorphogenesis).
Albino cotyledons, albino or glossy yellow rosette leaves, with a small portion having albino/glassy yellow variegated leaves.
albino developing seeds. Heterozygous seeds look normal but have moderate increases of threonine and branched-chain amino acids.
Albino mutant defective in proteins involved in photosynthesis. In light-grown seedlings no  chorophyll could be detected. After transferring seedlings to the dark and adding ALA, the level of Pchlide reached 30% of that found in wildtype. Mutans lack atTOC159, leading to peturbance of plastis protein import in mesophyll cells but not in guard cells. Mutansts do not survive beyond seedling stage.
Albino phenotype.
Albino phenotype even in the youngest part of the seedling, which often accumulates anthocyanins.
Albino plants where total clorophylls and cartenoids are less than 1% and 2%, respectively, of wildtype contents.
Albino seedling
Alkaline/neutral invertase activity in leaf extracts is about 30% lower compared to wild type. A/N invertase activity in mutant chloroplast extracts is undetectable.
Allele cannot be transmitted through pollen, therefore, homozygote plants cannot be recovered.  Pollen tubes either burst immediately upon germination, or are short and plump. Pollen tubes are unable to penetrate the cell wall of stigmatic cells.  Pollen tube actin cytoskeleton is severely disorganized.
All female gametophytes develop normally but half of the ovules remain unfertilized.  In these ovules, the pollen tube continues to grow inside the female gametophyte, fails to arrest its growth, and does not rupture to release the sperm cells.
All flower organs are converted to leaf-like organs, most strikingly on their adaxial surface. Abaxial epidermal cells are made up of a mixture of leaf- and sepal-like characteristics. Leaf characteristics include an abundance of branched trichomes.
All flower organs resemble sepals. The second whorl has four green sepal-like organs (instead of four white petals) which are differentiated of interspersed stomata and the conversion of nearly all of the cells into sepal cells. Sepals replace stamens in the third whorl. The fourth whorl is a reiteration of whorls 1, 2 and 3.
All kan1 kan2 stem vascular bundles displayed phloem surrounded by xylem, indicating adaxialized polarity.
Allowed significantly more growth of Pto DC3000 than wild-type plants.
All the heterozygous mutant plants were morphologically similar to wildtype  plants under normal growth conditions. Mutant siliques revealed abortion of a significant number of seeds (25%). Seeds were small, white, or brown and shriveled. Those abnormal  seeds contained small, rudimentary embryos that were arrested early during development at torpedo and bent-cotyledon stages. The 25%  aborted homozygous embryos were rudimentary  and arrested at or before the torpedo stage of development. Despite aberrant embryo development, endosperm development, and enlargement of seeds,  harboring small mutant embryos appeared normal  until the late torpedo stage, after which the endosperm  and the integument layers started to disintegrate.  Eventually the seeds turned brownish and dried out prematurely.
Almost 80% of carotenoids are represented by &beta;-carotene.
Almost completely infertile but can be allowed to self-fertilize under favorable temperature and light conditions.
Almost complete rescue of the ebf1-3 ebf2-3 phenotype. Plants are phenotypically indistinguishable from the wild type.
Almost complete suppression of lateral vein formation. Severe defects in vascular tissues of roots, specifically xylem.
Almost complete suppression of secondary bolt formation from the axils of rosette leaves.  Side shoot formation from the axils of cauline leaves of the primary bolt is not inhibited.  The point of separation between lateral shoots and the main axis is often displaced acropetally.  Branching from the first two or three leaves of secondary shoots is blocked.  Petal abscission is delayed.
Almost two-fold reduction in CpNpG and four-fold reduction in asymmetric methylation at the AtSN1 locus but not the 5S rDNA repeat.  Reduced accumulation of endogenous heterochromatin-related siRNAs.
alterations in F-actin organization in expanding trichomes
Alterations in number of cotyledons, shape and venation. Smaller and flatter rosette leaves with short petioles. Reduced root length and number of secondary roots. Early flowering under short-day. Shorter siliques with fewer seeds.
Altered auxin distribution in root.  Altered expression of PIN1 and PIN7 in root tip. Increased expression of ARR1.
Altered cell proliferation; increased cell elongation in hypocotyls in darkness (longer hypocotyls than wild type); increased cell production in roots grown in light (longer roots than wild type); altered sugar sensing; kanamycin resistant or silenced. Tolerant to high glucose concentration (6%).
Altered circadian regulation; reduced amplitude and accuracy of multiple circadian rhythms; disrupted circadian gating of light responses; altered morphology (slightly reduced hypocotyl elongation, architecture of rosettes similar to wild type but slightly smaller, slow formation of new rosette leaves, pale-green plants); early flowering and insensitive to photoperiod; affected CAB clock in the mid to late subjective night (a phase at which any human activity often requires coffee)
altered fatty acid composition (strongly reduced C16 content), 25% reduction of phosphatidylglycerol content, no obvious growth defect.
Altered leaf morphology: fewer veins than wild type and a distinct lack of higher-ordered veins.
altered leaf shape, reduced fertility,elongated hypocotyl resulted from elongated epidermal and cortex cells, elongated pedicel resulted from elongated epidermal pavement cells and increased cortex cell numbers
Altered leaf venation pattern. Compared to the wild type, vascular density of the first leaf in mutants was increased (Fig 7, in Alonso-Peral et al, 2006).
Altered lignin content.
altered nonphotochemical quenching of chlorophyll fluorescence; unable to convert violaxanthin to zeaxanthin in excessive light via the xanthophyll cycle; affects the structural gene encoding violaxanthin deepoxidase; exhibits greatly reduced nonphotochemical quenching. demonstrating that violaxanthin deepoxidation is required for the bulk of rapidly reversible nonphotochemical qenching; altered regulation of photosynthetic energy conversion is associated with increased sensitivity to photoinhibition.
Altered petal morphology. A wild-type flower has four petals of almost the same size and shape. A petal is flat from top to bottom, and the bottom part is narrow and greenish. In rbe-1, petals were deformed and their degree of morphological abnormality varied from a mild phenotype of a reduced blade at the top, an intermediate phenotype of spoon-shaped petals with a small blade and a short filamentous stalk at the base, to a severe phenotype of filaments only. In some cases, no petals or filaments were observed at the position of petal formation.
altered phenylpropanoid metabolism; reduced sinapoyl malate, syringyl lignin and sinpoyl choline, probably due to lack of conversion of ferulate to 5-hydroxyferulate; may be sensitive to UV-B radiation.
altered pollen surface morphology
altered red light sensitivity
Altered response to auxin and cytokinin
altered root meristem function resulting in short roots, also affecting the shoot meristem.
Altered seed pigmentation pattern due to a lack of proanthocyanidin (PA) accumulation in the endothelium.  The inner cell layer of the inner integument showed an abnormal cell shape.  The endothelial layer may be absent or the identity of this cell layer is changed.
Altered seed storage composition, reduced oil and protein body contents with concurrent accumulation of starch; developing embryos have white colored appearance; cotyledons and hypocotyl cells contain no recognizable protein bodies and few oil bodies; starch granules, membrane stacks, vesicles, and vacuoles are present in cells (all of which are absent in wt cells); oil bodies contain higher electron density substances than wt; mature seeds shrink upon desiccation (as a consequence of insufficient deposition of storage molecules) and are lethal; kanamycin resistant.
Altered vegetative morphology and response to hormones
Although a rapid decrease of ABA levels during the first 6h after red light treatment was observed as in wild type, ABA levels in mutant seeds treated with far red/red light were higher than those in wild type.
Although at 17?C, the gi mutant and the wild type have no significant period difference (measured by the free-running periods of the leaf movement rhythms), as the temperature increased (22 and 27?C), the period of the mutant becomes significantly shorter than that of the wild type.
Although ectopic overexpression of HDG11 causes increased drought tolerance, there is no evidence for reduced drought tolerance in hdg11-2 hdg12 double mutants. The mutants have a wild type appearance, with the exception of having increased trichome branching.
Although ectopic overexpression of HDG11 confers increased drought tolerance, hdg11-2 mutants do not appear to be less drought tolerant than wild type plants.
Although ggt1-1 did not affect cold tolerance of plants kept in the dark, mutant plants subjected to cold and light treatment exhibited severe leaf chlorosis. This light sensitivity of ggt1-1 could be alleviated either by reduced light intensity or by growth on media containing sucrose.
Although growth of the mutant is slightly inhibited, the overall morphology is the same as that of wild type.
Although in the absence of treatment cotyledon growth is similar between wildtype (WT) and mutant, in the presence of brassinolide, WT cotyledons increased by 83% while those of mutant only increased by 49%.
Although irx14 mutants have a reduction in xylose levels and display xylem irregularities, they do not appear substantially different from wild type plants. However, they are of slightly shorter stature and have thinner stems. Their siliques are also less well-developed and have fewer seeds. Mutants seem to be able to form the oligosaccharide leader present at the reducing end of xylan chains, but appear to be defective in xylan chain elongation. Their xylan chains seem to show the normal branching pattern found in wild type xylan chains, but glucuronic acid (GlcUA) is largely replaced by methylglucuronic acid (MeGlcUA). They are capable of accumulating cellulose throughout development, but they have slightly lower total cellulose levels than WT plants at a late developmental stage.
Although irx7 mutants have significantly reduced xylose levels and seem to be defective in the production of an oligosaccharide leader found on the reducing end of most xylan chains, their xylan chains seem to show the normal branching pattern found in wild type xylan chains. However, the glucuronic acid found in wild type xylan chains is largely replaced by methylglucuronic acid.
Although irx8 mutants have significantly reduced xylose levels and seem to be defective in the production of an oligosaccharide leader found on the reducing end of most xylan chains, their xylan chains seem to show the normal branching pattern found in wild type xylan chains. However, the glucuronic acid found in wild type xylan chains is largely replaced by methylglucuronic acid. irx8 mutants are capable of accumulating cellulose throughout development, but they have lower total cellulose levels than wild type plants at middle and late developmental stages.
Although irx9 mutants have a reduction in xylose levels, they retain the ability to form the oligosaccharide leader present at the reducing end of xylan chains. However, they appear to be defective in xylan chain elongation. Their xylan chains seem to show the normal branching pattern found in wild type xylan chains, but glucuronic acid (GlcUA) is largely replaced by methylglucuronic acid (MeGlcUA). They are capable of accumulating cellulose throughout development, but they have lower total cellulose levels than WT plants at middle and late developmental stages.
Although more than 60% of the double mutant have two trichome branches, at least 30% are unbranched.
Although most of the enzyme activities assayed can be detected  in the mutant embryos, most of the staining patterns obtained are aberrant: glucokinase is detected in all the embryo but with a decreased intensity of staining; G6PDH and 6PGDH at 12 DAF, and PGI and ADH at 15 DAF are non-homogeneous; PGM at 15 DAF is detected in small areas of the apical region of the embryo.
Although mutant seedlings display normal acropetal auxin transport in the root, basipetal auxin transport is reduced by about 50%. Root waving proceeds normally in the mutant seedlings, but gravitropic curvature is enhanced, occurring more quickly and to a greater degree than in wild type seedlings.
Although no variation in sucrose content of leaves placed under normal temperature conditions compared to wild type leaves, a substantial decrease in sucrose content was observed when the plants were placed under cold treatment (24h).
Although the gene that is mutated in this plant encodes a protein that is 49% identical to the IBR10 protein implicated in indole-3-butyric acid (IBA) responses, this mutant displays a normal wild-type IBA response.
Although the overall growth of young rglg1 rglg2 seedlings closely resembled that of wild-type plants, the early rosette leaves were more elongated and darker. These early rosette leaves senesce after ~4 to 6 weeks of growth. The first emerging shoots were short and terminated by one or few flowers yielding fertile siliques. Later developing shoots were longer. Another difference between the wild type and the rglg1 rglg2 mutant was leaf shape and architecture. Mutant leaves were more oblong and often asymmetric and had reduced numbers of veins. Whereas leaf initials in the wild type formed a spiral, with an ~137.5? angle between leaf initials, the rglg1 rglg2 mutant formed two initials opposite to each other and then switched by 90? to form the next pair of opposing leaves. Thus, rglg1 rglg2 plants often had a decussate pattern of leaf mergence, instead of the spiral pattern of wild-type Arabidopsis. Additional phenotypes of aerial plant parts, in particular an increased cell size.
Although the yeast homolog of AtFBP7 is reported to bind to eEF-2, the steady state levels of eEF-2 are not altered in fbp7 mutants under normal temperature conditions, or in response to heat or cold stress.
Although this mutant is strongly delayed in its development, it is still able to perform the switch from vegetative to reproductive growth at approximately the same time as wild type.
Among the embryos derived from a tdt-1 heterozygote, 25% were clearly distinguishable by their misshapen cells (5 of 23). These embryos contained small dense cells in the SAM region; however, they were not organized into distinct layers and they did not appear as a dome.
Amorphous, club-like seedlings.  Reduced growth of root and shoot apices. Defects in cell plate assembly during cytokinesis.
Analysis of the mitochondrial electron transport chain revealed a marked and general decrease in the abundance of the protein complexes in mutant plants with respect to the wild type.
Analysis of xyloglucan tightly attached to cellulose indicates a relative increase of fucosylated oligosaccharides compared to loosely bound xyloglucan in wild-type cell walls. However, the amounts of fucosylated  oligosaccharides in loosely and tightly bound xyloglucan are equal.
Anthers contain polyads with five or six microspores (compared to four in wild-type).
Anthers have less, smaller or malformed lobes in comparison to wild type and do not open.  Cells in the stomium region and the neighboring septum cells do not undergo cell wall thickening and degeneration as in wild type.
Anthers in double mutant plants appeared abnormal at a very early stage and lack the endothecium, middle, and tapetum layers. Further analyses revealed that cells interior to the epidermis (in anther tissue) acquire some characteristics of pollen mother cells (PMCs), suggesting defects in cell fate specification. The pollen mother-like cells degenerate before the completion of meiosis, suggesting that these cells are defective.
Anthers of plants homozygous for a T-DNA insertion in At2g40850 contained only a small number of pollen grains, and consequently, few seeds were produced per plant. Microscopic examination of the mutant anthers revealed that meiosis, the earliest step of pollen formation, was not affected. However, after tetrads had formed, the cells of the tapetum showed abnormally enlarged vacuoles. Later in development, pollen grains exhibited irregular shapes and, in mature anthers, most of them had collapsed.
Anthers on early flowers fail to produce pollen grains, anthers on later flowers produce a small number of pollen grains. Tapetum does not develop normally. Callose cell wall is thinner.
Anthers were shorter and aged earlier. Chromosome  segregation is severely disturbed.
A number of ester-bound monomers were reduced in the mutant.
aos (GL1) single mutant was generated by backcrossing the original aos to Col-0. aos (GL1) single mutant leaves produce fewer trichomes than wild-type (ca. 30% reduction). Morphology and branching number of aos (GL1) trichomes are normal. aos (GL1) does not increase leaf trichome density in response to wound treatment.
Apart from a slight increase in rosette leaf size, no visible phenotype was observed.
apm2 mutants showed decreased efficiency of PTS1- and PTS2- (peroxisome targeting signal)-dependent protein transport into peroxisome.  apm2 mutation also represses plant growth.
apm4 mutants showed decreased efficiency of PTS1- and PTS2- (peroxisome targeting signal)-dependent protein transport into peroxisome.  apm4 mutation also represses plant growth.
Appears similar to the single mutants.
Approximately 20% of embryo sacs show invasion by multiple pollen tubes. About 25% of embryo sacs abort. Morphology and development of the embryo sacs appears normal.
Approximately 25% of mutant seeds were dry and shrunken. Embryo lethal, embryo development arrested at globular stage. Alteration of endosperm development occurred at the same stage - cellularization of endosperm is blocked with noticeable enlarged nuclei with enlarged nucleoli in both chalazal and peripheral regions. Seed defects similar to ttn mutants.
Approximately 40% of mutant seeds germinate after far red/red light treatment, whereas wild type germination was suppressed almost entirely.
A proportion of pre-meiotic ovules have two MMCs and have several abnormally enlarged sub-epidermal cells.
A proportion of pre-meiotic ovules have two MMCs and have several abnormally enlarged sub-epidermal cells.Plants are fertile and show no signs of ovule or seed abortion.
A proportion of pre-meiotic ovules have two MMCs and have several abnormally enlarged sub-epidermal cells. Post-meiotic ovules showed two independently developing  female gametophytes at a frequency of 43.3%
A quarter of drn-1 drnl-2/DRNL-2 progeny, genotyped as double-homozygous mutants had pin-like embryos, with complete absence of cotyledons.  They directly initiated leaves from a functional shoot apical meristem.
A residual derubylation activity can be observed in the double mutant seedlings.
arf8-4 mutation results in the uncoupling of fruit development from pollination and fertilization and gives rise to seedless (parthenocarpic) fruit.
Around one-third of the ovules from pcs1/+ plants showed abnormal morphology at the stage of flower opening which then turned brown and degenerated a few days post-pollination. Around 10 to 15% of developing seeds from a self-pollinated pcs1/+ plant were homozygous for the mutant allele, and all pcs1/pcs1 seeds were aborted at early stages. In developing embryos, there was no obvious differences between wt and pcs1 embryos before the heart stage. At the torpedo stage, however, pcs1 embryos underwent degeneration. Degenerated cells were apoptotic, which indicates that the pcs1 mutation causes excessive cell death of embryonic tissues.
arp4-1 mutation causes partial sterility. Homozygous mutants had poorly developed siliques with a few or no seeds, compared with heterozygous mutant or wild type siliques that were fully filled with seeds. Flowers on the homozygous sterile plants were often slightly smaller and open for considerably longer periods than wild type, and a majority of them (80 to 90%) remained unfertilized. Otherwise, mutant plants revealed only mild very morphological and developmental phenotypes. The anthers from the sterile plants were often smaller, more heart shaped, and contained fewer pollen grains compared with wild type anthers, which were somewhat oblong and fully filled with pollen In addition, the mutant pollen grains were slightly larger than wild type. Because the mutant stamens often had shorter filaments than the wild type self-pollination was seldom efficient. However, upon manual pollination, pollen from the homozygous mutant plants germinated on self or wild type stigmas and produced fertile seeds, indicating that the mutant pollen grains, although larger, were viable. When homozygous mutant plant was pollinated with wild type pollen, the cross-pollination resulted in near normal development of siliques and production of seeds suggesting that the female development was not affected by the arp4-1 mutation. Sterility in the homozygous mutant plants is the result of production of fewer pollen and inefficient self-pollination. Mutant plants had a 35 to 40% reduction in the amount of AtARP4 protein compared with wild type.
Arrest at torpedo stage during embryo development. Can germinate after cold stratification and extended incubation. Embryos show increased deposition of cell wall material.
arrest in embryo sac development; albino due to absence of chloroplast
Arrest of embryogenesis occurred predominantly at heart stage. The following abnormalities were observed: premature or abnormal division of hypophyseal cell, underdeveloped short suspensor, abnormalities in procambial cell divisions, abnormalities in protoderm formation, underdeveloped endosperm with delayed cellularization.
Arsenic accumulation appeared slightly decreased in the mutants, but it did not differ significantly from that of wild type.
aru-2 mutants pollinated with A. arenosa pollen showed an increase in ovules with  PT overgrowth.
ascorbate deficient
A severe reduction (~10-fold) of THIC levels in plants decreases vitamin B1 (thiamin diphosphate (TPP)) levels and also leads to changes in the levels of numerous other metabolites since so many primary metabolic enzymes require a TPP co-factor. For example, alanine, asparagine, methionine, phenylalanine, tryptophan, and malate levels rise while fumarate, gentiobiose, and ribose  levels decrease. thiC mutants are chlorotic and arrest in their development at the cotyledon stage.The mutant phenotype can be largely rescued by continuous supplementation with thiamin.
As for the root growth assay, the root elongation of both the mutant and the wild-type was inhibited at lower concentrations of TNT than 2,6-DNT. In addition, there was no statistically significant difference of the root elongation between the gst mutant and the wild-type exposed to different concentrations of 2,6-DNT and TNT from t-test.
A short-root phenotype with the phenotype in the aerial part that is similar to those of the tsk mutant. The roots in mutant seedlings were approximately one-third as long as those from wild type plants. This reduced growth became more pronounced at later time points. The root apical meristem was disorganized, and individual cell types, such as QC or initial cells, were difficult to discern. The aerial part of teb-1 plants also showed defects in morphology, such as abnormal phyllotaxy, highly serrated and asymmetric leaves and a fasciated stem. The cellular organization of the SAM was severely disturbed - L1 and L2 layers showed irregular cell division in mutant plants.
A  significant but much smaller reduction of the number of cell  files was observed compared to the shr-2 mutant but no differences were found in the  number of stele initials or in the width of the stele 100 &mu;m  above the QC.
As in the La-er ecotype (mutant background Col), a single exposure of knockout mutant seedlings to 2 h of low R/FR at subjective dusk is sufficient to induce a significant promotion of hypocotyl elongation, whereas a similar treatment at subjective dawn leads to an inhibition of elongation.
A small fraction (~2.5%) of npy1-1 single mutants have abnormal cotyledons, but they do not form the pin-like inflorescences observed in the npy1-1 yuc1yuc4 triple mutants.
Assay for RNA editing defects shows no difference from wild type suggesting C terminal region is not required for this function.
A sucrose-independent germination phenotype. Mutants have reduced medium- and long-chain Acyl-CoA enzyme activity. Lipid catabolism during germination and early post-germinative growth was unaltered in the acx1-1 mutant; seedling growth and establishment in the absence of an exogenous supply of sucrose was unaffected. Jasmonic acid accumulation was largely reduced upon wounding of mutant plants when compared to the wild type.
asymmetric and lobed rosette leaves, leaf edges curl under irregularly.
asymmetric and lobed rosette leaves, leaf edges slightly curled under, somewhat triangular-shaped leaves.
At 18?C, the phenotype is indistinguishable from that of wildtype.
At 21?C, there was no significant difference between the double mutant and wild type; however, at 26?C, there was significantly less free IAA in cyp79B2 cyp79B3 relative to Col-0. In addition, the cyp79B3 mutant showed a modest decrease in free IAA compared with Col-0 at 26?C.
At 4 DAG, the number of lateral root primordia is increased in the Wassilewskija (Ws) wild type , but the increase was two times greater in the hy5-Ks50 mutant than in Ws.
At 6 to 7 DAG, the double mutants uniformly start to form the first pair of true leaves and eventually develop into impaired small plantlets, with dark red cotyledons and asymmetrical leaves.
AtBAG7 knockouts treated with tunicamycin, an inhibitor of glycosylation, exhibited pronounced growth retardation and chlorosis after 5 days.
atcipk6kd exhibited cotyledons fused at the  base and thick hypocotyls. Slight reduction in root length was observed in  atcipk6kd seedlings 14 days after sowing. Delayed  emergence of lateral roots. Decrease in shoot to root auxin transport  at the apex and at the hypocotyl?root junction. Greater sensitivity  to salt stress. Decreased expression of genes involved in polar auxin transport and abiotic and biotic stress
At flowering, the mutants  achieve a rosette diameter ca. 30% that of wild-type  plants and an inflorescence stem height ca. 20% that  of wild-type plants
ath1-1  mutants showed a 95% reduction in FLC expression and a  resulting increase of FT, but had no significant effect  on the expression of FRI.
athtk1-3 mutants have no obvious phenotypic abnormalities when grown in typical greenhouse conditions. But, across a range of different hydroponically-provided sodium concentrations, these mutants accumulate less sodium in their roots than wild type plants and more sodium in their leaves than wild type plants. Accordingly, the roots of these mutants are less sensitive to salt in root elongation assays, and the leaves are hypersensitive to salt in plant growth assays.
atinva mutants have reduced root growth, reduced invertase activity, and increased expression of antioxidant genes under basal conditions.
atinvg mutants have reduced root growth, reduced invertase activity, and increased expression of antioxidant genes under basal conditions.
AtMIN7 KO plants infected by the CEL-deletion mutant of Pseudomonas syringae DC3000 showed increased bacterial multiplication and enhanced chlorotic and necrotic disease symptoms, compared with Col-0 plants. AtMIN7 KO plants remained resistant to the nonpathogenic hrc mutant bacteria and responded to Pst DC3000 similarly to wild-type Col-0 plants.
atm tert mutants undergo Telomere Rapid Deletion (TRD) events, that can lead to the production of a chromosome with a very short telomere. Just one of these structures can  prompt end-to-end chromosomal fusion events in the G5 generation. The anaphase bridges apparent in these atm/tert mutants seem to involve only a single chromosome in each distinct mutant line, and seem to occur between sister chromatids. These plants exhibit the same overall level of aneuploidy in the G5 generation as tert mutants do in the G6 generation (~52% of cells showing abnormal centromeric signals in interphase). atm/tert mutants are not as likely to undergo ALT (alternative lengthening of telomeres, a telomerase-independent process) as tert mutants, implicating ATM in this process.
atnig1-1 plants show reduced survival rate, fresh weight,  chlorophyll content, and protein content under salt stress.
atnmnat/+ plants frequently produced shorter siliques with lower seed set
atozf1 mutants are more sensitive to oxidative stress (various concentration of H2O2). In the presence of H2O2, MDA (malondialdehyde) content in atozf1 is significantly higher than that in WT. atozf1 mutants display lower activities of catalase and guaiacol peroxidase, higher chlorosis, and down-regulated expression of antioxidant genes under oxidative stress. Under normal condition, atozf1 mutant exhibit similar phenotype with WT.
atpol{lambda] mutants exhibit hypersensitive growth response to UV-B irradiation. Reduced proficiency in double strand break repair and nucleotide excision repair.
atprmt4a-1 mutants do not have any obvious phenotypic defects when compared to wild-type plants, But, the double mutants atprmt4a-1 atprmt4b-1 and atprmt4a-1 atprmt4b-2 have delayed flowering under long days.
atprmt4a-2 mutants do not have any obvious phenotypic defects when compared to wild-type plants, But, the double mutants atprmt4a-2 atprmt4b-1 and atprmt4a-2 atprmt4b-2 have delayed flowering under long days.
atprmt4b-1 mutants do not have any obvious phenotypic defects when compared to wild-type plants. But, the double mutants atprmt4a-1 atprmt4b-1 and atprmt4a-2 atprmt4b-1 have delayed flowering under long days.
atprmt4b-2 mutants do not have any obvious phenotypic defects when compared to wild-type plants, But, the double mutants atprmt4a-1 atprmt4b-2 and atprmt4a-2 atprmt4b-2 have delayed flowering under long days.
atr/tert mutants show a more rapid loss of telomeric length than tert and atm/tert mutants, and show a more rapid degeneration in growth habit, becoming small, with aberrant leaf shape, and very low fertility by the third generation whereas tert mutants and tert/atm mutants show normal growth features until later generations. These mutants also have marked defects in chromosomal organization by G3 as evidenced by the presence of anaphase bridges, sometimes involving multiple chromosomes, a phenotype not seen in tert or atm/tert mutants.
A triple mutant of etr1, ran1 and rte1. has ethylene insensitive phenotype.
ats-1 ovules have only a single integument in place of the normal two.  The integument appears to be derived from congenital fusion of the two wild-type integuments and consists of three to five cell layers, with characteristics of both wild-type outer and inner integuments.
At seedling stage, ncp1-1 had shorter root meristems zones when compared to WT. Compared to WT plants, ncp1-1 single mutant plants were slightly taller with shorter siliques and smaller flowers.Shorter root phenotype owing to a decrease in cell number. Reduced fertility.
At seedling stage pok1/pok2 double mutants differ from wild-type by having smaller cotyledons as well as shorter, wider roots and hypocotyls. Adult plants exhibit a dwarfed stature, but all organs are present, although miniaturized. Plants are fertile but produce reduced numbers of seeds. Microscopic observation revealed highly disordered root meristem cell patterns, with most walls lacking parallel or perpendicular alignment to the longitudinal axis of the root and most cells exhibiting irregular shapes. Examination of cell wall patterns suggested that misoriented cell divisions were largely responsible for the irregular cell patterns. In pok1/pok2 double mutant embryos, misplaced cell walls were observed as early as the octant stage of embryogenesis. Throughout embryogenesis, the mispositioning of cell walls continues, eventually giving rise to slightly misshapen mature embryos with a stubby appearance, compared to wild-type. However, incomplete cell walls and wall stubs, a common feature of cytokinesis-defective mutants, were not observed in Toluidine blue-stained sections of double mutant embryos.
At stage 3-I, the early megaspore development and meiosis proceed normally. By contrast, at stage 3-VI, only ~70% had a normal-looking seven-nuclear embryo sac.
atstar1 knock-out line exhibited increased sensitivity to Al. The roots of the knockout line were severely inhibited,in the presence of 2 mM Al whereas those of the wild type were hardly affected.
Attenuated calcium signaling response after MAMP exposure. Reduced ROS accumulation, flg22 induced MAPK activation. More resistant to MAMP induced growth inhibition.
AtTERT deficiency leads to telomere shortening and absence of telomerase activity.
At the flowering stage, the flowers of the homozygous progeny showed normal floral structures consisting of the four floral organs: sepals, petals, stamens and carpels. However, the mutant flowers contained no dehiscent anthers, whereas wild-type flowers developed dehiscent anthers with dispersed pollen grains. The three-dimensional surface images revealed that the wild-type anthers at flowering stage were broken and many pollen grains released, while mutant anthers remained enlarged yet failed to dehisce.
At the flowering stage, the mutant has a smaller root system, tiny leaves with delayed senescence, shorter petioles and inflorescences, and a reduced number of flowers and siliques. Trichomes are normal and flower size and shape, and produced fertile seeds (albeit in reduced number).
At the reproductive stage, the mutants exhibit severe developmental defects that result in dwarf stature and the loss of apical dominance (52 DAG).
At the restrictive temperature, epidermal bulging is observed and roots fail to grow straight in the elongation zone although this mutation does not appear to abolish gravitropic sensitivity.
At the seedling stage, tso2-1 mutants were similar to the wild type, with normal roots, cotyledons, and young leaves. Abnormalities first appeared in the fifth rosette leaf and persisted in all subsequent leaves, floral  organs, and siliques. The abnormalities included white sectors in green organs, uneven thickness, rough surfaces, and irregular margins of leaves or floral organs. Stamens occasionally exhibited carpel characteristics indicating homeotic transformation. The rough and uneven sepals apparently resulted from abnormally enlarged  cells as well as cell clusters projecting above the epidermis. The white sectors appeared to result from an absence of chloroplasts in patches of mesophyll cells and the formation of large air spaces or tiny cells in subepidermal cell layers. Occasionally, tso2 mutants exhibited  fasciated stems on which a single SAM, a group of self-renewing cells at the shoot tip, was enlarged and split into multiple SAMs. Finally, tso2 mutants exhibited reduced fertility, with ;29% aborted seeds. tso2-1 floral tissues were found to contain significantly reduced levels of all four dNTPs. tso2-1 exhibited slightly  increased sensitivity to UV-C light, but only at high UV-C light levels.
At the vegetative stage, the csn5a plantlets are characterized by small, light green, and curly rosettes (12 and 14DAG), which are almost completely depleted of trichomes, in contrast with wild-type.
A twofold decrease in  nicotinamidase activity was seen in dry seed extracts of the mutant.
Auxin (IAA) concentration was almost twofold lower in roots of 2-week-old mutant seedlings compared to wild type.
auxin resistant; irregular rosette leaves, slightly curled around leaf axis; roots elongate on auxin-containing medium; defective root gravitropism; reduced number of lateral roots
auxin resistant; irregular rosette leaves, slightly curled around leaf axis; roots very auxin resistant; defective root gravitropism; reduced number of lateral roots; plant appearance similar to axr1-12, but more pronounced; dwarf, bushy plants; reduced plant height; reduced fertility.
auxin resistant; narrow, irregular rosette leaves, slightly curled around leaf axis; roots elongate on auxin-containing medium; defective root gravitropism; reduced number of lateral roots - greater reduction than for either single mutant; dwarf, bushy plants; reduced plant height; ethylene resistant; reduced fertility.
background Wassilewskija hypocotyls with shortened length and increased diameter, roots had a swollen aspect with increased initiation from the crown and showed reduced growth and gravitropism   in soil plant maintained the dwarfed phenotype with a rosette never exceeding 1 to 1.5 cm in diameter, developed a bushy miniature rosette of round leaves, growth of cyp98A3 plants was arrested latest at the onset of primary stem development (2 weeks later than wild-type), showed darker leaf coloration , severe alteration of lignin content and composition - mainly H units (95% to 3.5% in wild-type), ectopic lignification in roots
Between 21 and 34% of immature siliques have seeds that are either albino or severely malformed and abort later, or have non-fertilized ovules.
Blocking of greening was enhanced in the mutant exposed to hourly pulses of FR.
Blue-light-grown double-mutant seedlings have a longer hypocotyl than seedlings carrying the hyh or hy5 mutation alone.
Blue-light- or dark-grown mutants contain high levels of anthocyanins and are not responsive to cytokinins.
Bolting time is slightly delayed (2 to 3 days) and the inflorescence stem length is reduced. However, morphology and fertility of the flowers is relatively unaffected.
bop1-3 plants, which have slightly reduced BOP1 transcript levels, have a weak phenotype. This phenotype consists of a single ectopic outgrowth from the leaf petiole region in approximately 2-3% of the homozygous plants.
bop1 bop2 kan1 kan2 stems had a decreased ratio of adaxialized vascular phenotypes compared with kan1 kan2 stems. Similar to what was observed in petioles, 6.7% of bop1 bop2 kan1 kan2 stems exhibited an abaxialized phenotype of xylem surrounded by phloem, while others (13.3%) had both types of vasculature in a single stem.
Both dark- and light-grown homozygous mutant seedlings are severely retarded in their development, with significantly reduced cell  elongation in their hypocotyls and reduced cell enlargement in their cotyledons. Both mature seeds and seedlings homozygous  for the mutations exhibit dark purple coloration in their hypocotyls and cotyledons due to high levels of anthocyanin  accumulation. Most important, homozygous mutants are adult lethal. Occasionally, some mutant individuals will develop up to three pairs of tiny true leaves before senescence.  Not a single mutant plant has been able to survive to reproduce.
Both endogenous RanGAP1 and RanGAP1-GFP were absent from the nuclear envelope in root-tip cells of the triple mutant.
Both fruit length and seed set are reduced in the mutant. Mature fruit are approximately  30% shorter than wild-type and the number of fertilized seeds is reduced by 60%.
Both glucokinase (GK) and fructokinase (FK) activities are completely absent from mutant embryos throughout the maturation process.
Both heterozygoytes and homozygotes have a WT phenotype
Both mutation are additive, as shown by the further shortened hypocotyl length of the double mutant.
Both the size and number of the epidermal cells were found to be decreased in the mutant. However, stomata cells appeared normal in terms of morphology and fraction of total epidermal cells.
Boxed leaf phenotype under normal light conditions.
branchless trichomes with blunt tips
Brassicasterol/crinosterol production activity is almost completely abolished. Stigmasterol content, however, was the same as that of wildtype.
brown seed coat, however reduced level of flavonoids in the tapetum cells. Unlike the wild type where flavonoids are accumulated in the tapetosomes in the tapetum cells, the mutant has flavonoids accumulated in the cytosol
bud1 plants develop significantly fewer  lateral roots, simpler venation patterns, and a quicker and greater curvature in the gravitropism assay. In addition, the bud1  plants have shorter hypocotyls at high temperature (29C) under light, which is a characteristic feature of defective auxin  action. Determination of tritium-labeled indole-3-acetic acid transport showed that the increased expression of MKK7 in bud1  or the repressed expression in MKK7 antisense transgenic plants causes deficiency or enhancement in auxin transport,  indicating that MKK7 negatively regulates polar auxin transport.
Bulging epidermal cells on the roots. The percentage of these cells appears to be dependent on environmental conditions (light intensity for example). This phenotype is not observed in the meristem but is first observed basal of the meristem.
Bulging of epidermal cells is observed in roots but not in the hypocotyl.
Bushy, formed several shoots, and was generally more similar to the rglg1 rglg2 parent. Leaf shape in the rosette, however, resembled the axr3-1 mutant.
Bushy appearance due to an increase in primary and secondary order branching.
bZIP60 mRNA splicing is completely abolished in ire1a-2 (SALK_018112)/ire1b-1 (GABI_638B07) double mutant whereas it is still detectable in ire1a-2 and ire1b-1 single mutants. ire1a-2/ire1b-1 double mutant is much more sensitive to tunicamycin than wild-type and ire1a-2 and ire1b-1 single mutant plants.  Induction of a number of ER stress-inducible genes is much weaker in the ire1a-2/ire1b-1 double mutant than in the wild-type.
bZIP60 mRNA splicing is detectable in ire1a-2 (SALK_018112), whereas it is completely abolished in ire1a-2 (SALK_018112)/ire1b-1 (GABI_638B07) double mutant.
bZIP60 mRNA splicing is detectable in ire1b-1 (GABI_638B07), whereas it is completely abolished in ire1a-2 (SALK_018112)/ire1b-1 (GABI_638B07) double mutant.
Callose deposition in the phloem, especially in the sieve elements, is greatly redicued in cs7-1. During sieve lement development, callose fails to accumulate in the plasmodesmata of incipient sieve plates, resulting in the formation of sieve plates with less pores and no callose. Wounding can induce callose accumulation in leaves of cs7-1, but cannot induce callose accumulation in the sieve plates in this mutant. The mutant plants exhibite moderate reduction in seedling height and produce aberrant pollen grains and short siliques with aborted embryos.
Callus formation is accelerated in experiments performed with lhp1-1 mutant seeds.
Callus-induced roots from the mutant displayed the mutant phenotype when they grew under restrictive conditions. All the mutants responded to a gravitropic stimulus in a manner similar to wild type although the change of the direction of growth was slower than wild type.
Can germinate and establish seedlings in MS media supplemented with 2.5 mM valine.
Can germinate and perform early growth under high-salt concentration that are inhibitory for wild type seeds.
Cannot recover homozygous double mutant.
Carpels are shorter and narrower than wild type and the cells of both valves and style mature later than wild type.
carries a T-DNA insertion at atpC1 gene encoding the gamma subunit of the plastid ATP synthase complex. Mutants are non-photoautotrophic. They developed pale green cotyledons without primary leaves. Rescued by growing on sucrose-supplemented MS medium. Mutants have high dark fluorescence level and normal steady state fluorescence level during illumination. Mutant chloroplasts are deficient with starch grains, have swollen lumen and disordered grana stacks.
Cauline leaves and sepal trichomes show morphological defects.Specifically, leaf lamina is wider than WT in the third cauline leaf. These phenotypes indicate a delayed vegetative - to reproductive phase change.
Cauline leaves of bop1 frequently developed ectopic outgrowths from the basal region.
Cauline leaves of bop2 plants do not develop ectopic outgrowths from the basal region.
Caulis fasciation mutant. Unstable phenotype. Expressivity depends on growth condition fluctuations.
Caused only a slight increase in leaf number under short-day conditions.
cbp60g-1 plants are more susceptible to infection by Pseudomonas syringae pv. maculicola ES4326.  The expression profile of plants challenged with P. syringae pv tomato DC3000 hrcC is altered.  Salicylic acid levels are lower in cbp60g-1 than in wild-type following treatment with flg22 peptide, challenge with P. syringae pv tomato DC3000 hrcC, or infection with P. syringae pv. maculicola ES4326 (only at an early time point).  CBP60g binds calmodulin, and calmodulin-binding is necessary for complementation of cbp60g-1 pathogen growth and salicylate defects. These phenotypes were interpreted as indicating a defect in activation of salicylate synthesis during a MAMP/PAMP (microbe/pathogen- associated molecular pattern) response.
cbp60g-2 plants are more susceptible to infection by Pseudomonas syringae pv. maculicola ES4326.  Salicylic acid levels are lower in cbp60g-2 than in wild-type following treatment with flg22 peptide or challenge with P. syringae pv. tomato DC3000 hrcC.
cch1-1 is paler than gun5-1.
cch mutant shows strong ABA insensitivity than wild-type in stomatal movement,  including promotion of stomatal closure and inhibition of stomatal opening. The mutant also shows weak ABA insensitivity in germination and growth after germination.
cell death and constitutive defense response
Cell number in first leaves decreased to <20% of the wild type level and cell size increased to more than 2.5-fold the wild type size.
Cell wall composition was altered in mutant plants. Analysis of cell wall polysaccharides isolated from mutant leaves and stems showed that arabinose content was reduced to about 75% and 46%, respectively, of wild-type levels. Immunohistochemical analysis indicated a specific decrease in arabinan with no change in other pectic domains or in glycoproteins. Radial cell expansion of the stem tissue was increased in mutant plants, but the cellular structure of the stem was also not altered. No other visible phenotypic changes were detected in the mutant plants.
cgld27 mutant shows a stronger growth defect compared to wild type in low Fe (1 ?M Fe) conditions. Root length of cgld27 under low Fe conditions is much smaller and the weight is almost half compared to wild type. The phenotype is exacerbated in alkaline soil (pH, 8.0) where the availability of iron is limited.
Changes in the concentrations of cytokinin nucleotides and conjugates.
Chilling of seedlings at 4?C for 1 month effectively induces flowering of ga1-3 without GA treatment. However, no bolting of the stem or flowering of the triple homozygous progeny could be detected even after 40 days of cold treatment.
Chlorophyll a/b ratio does not differ significantly from that of wildtype.
Chlorophyll a/b ratio is significantly higher than that of other genotypes.
Chlorophyll content about 35% of that of wild-type.
Chlorophyll content about 75% of that of wild-type.
Chlorophyll content further reduced compared to single mutant ahk3-7.
Chlorophyll contents decreased by approximately 40% compared to the parental line (ch1-1/GFP-CAO).
Chlorophyll levels in the mutant are dramatically reduced to ~20% of those of wild type.
Chloroplast differentiation was severely impaired in cotyledons but not in true leaves during early seedling growth, giving rise to the seedlings with white cotyledons. In sco1 chloroplast biosynthesis is slowed down leading to a delayed greening in cotyledons. Seed germination was delayed too in both, dark-grown seeds and light exposed seeds. Adult mutant plants had flowering time delayed for a week, while plant senescence was not affected. Mutant plants had reduced fresh weight throughout the life cycle. Seed set was affected too; mutant plants had reached only 40% of amount of seeds produced by the wild type plants.
Chloroplasts are smaller than wild type. lack thylakoids and contain many plastoglobules.
Chloroplasts of mesophyll cells completely lack thylakoids and are filled with large vesicles.
Chromosomes do not synapse during both male and female meiosis.  There is a total absence of chiasmata.  No meiotic recombination occurs.
cib1 or cib5 single mutant shows no obvious phenotype, and cib1cib5 double mutant showed a mild but statistically significant delay of flowering under a photoperiodic inductive condition (plants were grown in short-day photoperiod (9h light/15h dark) for 20 days and transfered to long-day photoperiod (16h light/ 8h dark) for 4 days, and removed back to short-day to continue grow until flowering.
clf-2 phenotype is rescued by ult1-3 allele.
clf leaf phenotype, but partially suppressed the early flowering phenotype.
Clusters of unbranched trichomes.
coi1-1 (GL1) single mutant was generated by backcrossing the original coi1-1 to Col-0. coi1-1 single mutant leaves produce fewer trichomes than wild-type (ca. 30% reduction). Morphology and branching number of coi1-1 trichomes are normal. coi1-1 does not increase trichome density in response to wounding or methyl jasmonate treatment.
Collapsed xylem vessels in roots and stems, suggesting a decrease in xylem wall strength in the homozygous mutants.
Columella root cap cells fail to detach.
compact rosette leaf, short petiole, round blade
Compact rosettes with shortened petioles and small leaf blades.
Compared to the lead extracts, comparable reductions in alkylglucosinolate profiles were observed when samples of ref2 seeds were analyzed; however, no consistent increases in indole glucosinolates were seen. In addition to decreases in the glucosinolates listed above, seeds of the mutants also contained significantly less benzoyloxyalkyl glucosinolates.
Compared to the wild type, mutant plants were consistently smaller and slightly pale, as was observed for the tgd1-1 mutants. Chlorophyll contents (Chlorophyll per gram of fresh weight) were reduced to a similar extent in the tgd1-1 and tgd2-1 mutants. Mutant plants had aberrant accumulation of oligogalactolipids and triacylglycerols; this was consistent with a disruption of the import of ER-derived lipids into the plastid.
Compared to the wild type, mutant seedlings were hypersensitive to gamma-irradiation.
Compared to the wild type, the mutant allele shows a decrease in galactan, but an increase in  arabinan.
Compared to the wild type, the mutant allele shows a decrease in the relative amount of galactan and arabinan.
Compared to wildtype, mutant cells gradually lose their ability to form calluses as they age.
Compared to wild type, no secondary thickening or lignification is seen in the anther  endothecium, although other tissues in the mutant plant undergo normal secondary thickening. As the anther dehydrates the endothecium layer distorts, shearing forces do not develop, and the anther fails to open.
Compared to wild-type plants, cotyledon veins of At5pt13-1 were with altered numbers (4%), in incorrect vein orientation (16.3%), with additional or altered loops (1.7%), with branches (1.3%), with intersections (1.3%) and fusions (5.3%) of the distal and proximal secondary veins, or  with acute angles (3.3%). In addition, the  cotyledon veins of At5pt13-1 were asymmetric, with flexed secondary veins and often multiple abnormalities,  such as asymmetry, abnormal caecal orientation, or  flex (10.7%). Statistical analyses revealed that around  64.7% of the total cotyledons showed obvious abnormality,  while the ratio of seedlings with abnormal cotyledons  reaches to approximately 90%.
Compared with the parent ein2 and EIN3ox plants, etiolated EIN3ox ein2 seedlings exhibited an intermediate phenotype in terms of hypocotyl and root lengths. A reduced EIN3 protein levels were detected in EIN3ox ein2-5 progeny compared with that of EIN3ox parent plants. The EIN3ox ein2 and five seo seedlings were completely unresponsive to ethylene application, similar to ein2. In addition, treatment with ACC failed to enhance the accumulation of EIN3 protein in EIN3ox ein2-5. The expression levels of ERF1 and EBF2 were not further increased by ethylene in the EIN3ox ein2 plant. By contrast, ethylene application enhanced EIN3 protein accumulation and ERF1 and EBF2 gene expression in the EIN3ox plants.
Compared with wild type, stigmas were smaller and more variable in size in hec1 hec3 mutants. There was also a slight tendency for the style to be somewhat longer in the double mutant.
Compared with wild-type trichomes, which normally are three-branched, the mutant has trichomes that are either two-branched or unbranched. Trichome stems and trichome branches are reduced in length, and the tips often are blunted.
Comparing the level of undegraded leaf starch, bam1 bam3 is more severe than that of either bam1 or bam3.
Comparing the level of undegraded leaf starch, bam3 bam4 is more severe than that of either bam3 or bam4.
Comparison of CS25026 to Columbia with and without salt stress (50mM NaCl from weeks 4 to 7 of growth) suggested a trend toward more growth of mutant in salty conditions (P=0.25, mean rosette diameter 21.5 in mutant and 11.5 in widltype).
Comparison of SALK_011721C to Columbia wildtype resulted in a trend toward earlier flowering in the mutant (P=0.1).
Comparison of SALK_043717C to Columbia resulted in a trend toward less biomass in the mutant (P=0.16) and more growth over time in the Columbia (exponential growth curve fit began at same level and slope increased more in Columbia, although statistical comparison of curve fits for mutant and wildtype gave P=0.3).
Comparison of SALK_049924C to Columbia with and without drought stress (withholding water from weeks 4 to 6 of growth) indicated that the mutant grew more slowly than Columbia (P=0.0016 for change in rosette diameter) and mutant growth was not altered by drought.  Columbia growth was reduced under these drought conditions.
Comparison of SALK_061426C to Columbia wildtype in normal lighting and under low light of 33 micromoles per meter-squared per second resulted in a trend toward earlier bolting in the mutant under low light (P=0.055).
Comparison of SALK_123839C to Columbia under normal growth conditions resulted in a trend toward increased leaf length in the mutant (P=0.13; median 22 for mutant,17 for Columbia).
Complete absence of cytosine methylation in two direct repeated sequences located in FWA 5' promoter and coding regions.  This is opposite to the strong methylation observed in wild-type FWA.  Hypomethylation activates expression of the gene and leads to late flowering.
Complete absence of root hairs, abnormal patterning of leaf epidermis, and dwarfism.
Complete absence of stomata.  Plants are small, pale and sterile.  Meristemoids undergo 3-6 rounds (vs. 1-3 rounds in wild type) of asymmetric division.  These divisions create a rosette pattern in the mute epidermis with an arrested, small triangular meristemoid at the center.
Complete elimination of CG methylation from AtSN1, but only a minor effect on non-CG methylation, and H3K9me2 was observed at wild-type levels.
Complete infertility.
Complete lack of recognizable stomata.  Clusters of small, narrow epidermal cells occur in the normal location of stomata.  Mutants arrest as pale plants with small rosette leaves and bushy inflorescences topped by one to three sterile flowers.
Complete loss of PSI-G in thylakoids.
Completely albino,  ceased growth, and died shortly after germination. Plastids in trx p plants lacked visible internal membrane structures,  including stromal and granal thylakoids as well as starch granules
Completely infertile.
Completely lacks lutein.
completely lost the ability to respond  to the chitin elicitor
Completely sterile with homeotic transformations in the second and thried floral whorls.  Slow growth, delayed development and a dramatic reduction in plant size. Rosette and cauline leaves are small and curled downwards as well as coiled in the proximodistal axes, both under short and long day conditions.  Root development is strongly impaired. Late flowering under both SD and LD conditions, with less leaves than WT.  Some mutants never flower.  Maintenance of the inflorescence shoot meristem is impaired.
Completely white seedlings. Restoration of Heterozygocity of FTSH5 allows chloroplast development in the cotyledons.
Completely white seedlings. Restoration of Heterozygocity of FTSH8 allows chloroplast development in the cotyledons.
compromised in EFR but not FLS2 signaling.
compromised in indolic glucosinolate biosynthesis.
Compromised in RPP4-mediated resistance.  Mutants allow increased growth of Hyaloperonospora parasitica hyphae frequently surrounded by a trail of necrotic plant cells.
Concentration of sucrose in the mutant roots are lower than in wild type. The concentration of <i>myo</i>-inositol is increased, as are those of glucose and fructose.
Constitutive expression of the marker gene PR-1::luciferase in the absence of pathogen infection; enhanced resistance to the necrotrophic pathogen Botrytis cinerea.
constitutive ferric chelate reductase activity, chlorotic
constitutively displays many Pi starvation responses and high arsenate resistance. phf1 affects Pi transport directly and this effect is largely specific to this nutrient
Constitutive overexpression of MIF1 caused dramatic  developmental defects, including dwarfism, reduced apical dominance, extreme longevity, dark-green leaves,  altered flower morphology, poor fertility, reduced hypocotyl length, spoon-like cotyledons, reduced root  growth, and ectopic root hairs on hypocotyls and cotyledons. In addition, 35S::MIF1 seedlings underwent  constitutive photomorphogenesis in the dark, with root growth similar to that in the light. Furthermore,  35S::MIF1 seedlings were demonstrated to be non-responsive to gibberellin (GA) for cell elongation,  hypersensitive to the GA synthesis inhibitor paclobutrazol (PAC) and abscisic acid (ABA), and hyposensitive to  auxin, brassinosteroid and cytokinin, but normally responsive to ethylene. The de-etiolation defect could not  be rescued by the hormones tested.
constitutive photomorphogenesis
Contain Reduced Levels of  Aliphatic Glucosinolates
Contains 90% of &alpha;-maltose and 10% of &beta;-maltose.
Contains about 18% of wild-type phylloquinone content but 50-70% of wild-type PSI activity.
Contains high levels of lutein.
Contains less homogalacturonan than wildtype.
Contains less than 2% of wild-type amount of fucose in aerial parts of the plant body. Fucose content in total root polysaccharides is only reduced by about 40%.
contains only 1% of wild-type myrosinase activity. Among the above-ground tissues, the activity is only detected in flowers.
contains only 5% of wild-type myrosinase activity, in the above-ground tissues
Contains three-fold more phytol than wildtype.
Coronatine, which effectively inhibits ABA-induced stomatal closure, cannot prevent it in the mutant, nor can it efficiently reopen its stomata.
Cotyledon areoles (regions of the lamina completely bordered by veins) were often incompletely closed, while in the wild type, the cotyledons contained three or four complete areoles. The reduction in vein numbers was also apparent in the first two rosette leaves, which had fewer secondary veins than the wild type. No quaternary veins and only a few tertiary veins, which ended blindly within the areoles, were present in mutant leaves, the intramarginal vein of which was occasionally interrupted.
Cotyledon expansion was reduced in the mutant  with respect to the wild type in response to Rc.
Cotyledons and leaves have open venation due to lack of distal junctions between secondary, tertiary and quaternary veins. fkd1-1 mutant leaves also show reduced expression of DR5::GUS, an auxin-responsive reporter gene.
Cotyledons and leaves have open venation due to lack of distal junctions between secondary, tertiary and quaternary veins. Mutant leaves also show reduced expression of DR5::GUS, an auxin-responsive reporter  gene.
Cotyledons are narrow, cup-shaped and point upward. Leaves are narrow, dark green and develop ectopic outgrowths on their abaxial side only.  Four to six stipules, rather than two, develop at the base of each leaf, surrounding its entire circumference.  Stems fail to elongate upon flowering.  Floral organ morphology is highly abnormal.  Mature ovules have reduced outer integuments. Aberrant positioning of cell types, primarily along the adaxial/abaxial lateral organ axis.
Cotyledons are smaller than in wild-type plants.
cotyledons fail to expand or green, and seedling growth arrests. Severely impaired in its ability to breakdown triacylglycero
cotyledons fail to expand or green, and seedling growth arrests. Severely impaired in its ability to breakdown triacylglycerol
cotyledons fail to expand or green, and seedling growth arrests. Severely impaired in its ability to breakdown triacylglycerol. Peroxisomes and oil bodies cluster together
Cotyledons in young homozygous progeny were red, most likely because chlorophyll was low or absent, and anthocyanin pigments accumulated.
Cotyledons of seven day old plants are paler than those of Col-0, with a 35-40% and 50% reduction in chlorophyll a and chlorophyll b contents compared with Col-0.  Induction of expression of light responsive genes RBCS-1A and CAB2 during germination is seriously impaired.
Cotyledons of seven day old plants are paler than those of Ws, with a 35-40% and 50% reduction in chlorophyll a and chlorophyll b contents compared with Ws. Newly produced youg leaves and shoots are yellowish.  During expansion, the leaves become gradually greener from the base to the distal end.  Induction of expression of light responsive genes RBCS-1A and CAB2 during germination is seriously impaired.
Cotyledons of wild-type and vcs-1 plants contain a primary vein and four secondary veins that form between two and four closed loops, whereas in vcs-7, the cotyledon secondary veins were mostly free-ending, resulting in a fork-like appearance.
cse-2 mutants were 37% smaller and 42% lighter at senescence than were those of the wild type. Plants have reduced lignin content and collapsed vessel elements.
csn5a-1 and csn5a-2 are virtually indistinguishable from each other in the initial few DAG, starting from 8 DAG and throughout the vegetative stage, the phenotype of csn5a-2 is less severe than that of csn5a-1, in terms of both rosette size and trichome density. This difference becomes particularly evident at the reproductive phase (52 DAG).
ctr1-like phenotype (short hypocotyls, short roots, and exaggerated apical hooks).
Cumulative phenotype compared to both single mutants.
Cup-shaped seedlings form with high frequency.  Less frequently fusions of one cotyledon margin are observed.
Curling of both rosette and cauline leaves and reduction in petal size in the second whorl.
Curly leaf phenotype.
Curly leaves, bushy plant, abormal petal distribution, atrophic anthers, male sterile fused carpels,extra trichomes in flower buds and about 15% of embryos abort.
Currents mediated by slow-activating vacuolar (SV) channels of mesophyll cell vacuoles were significantly smaller in kco1 plants compared to the wild-type
Curved, irregular morphology of pollen tubes, which are drastically stunted. This phenotype is visible early in the germination process (6h after germination). The pollen tube remains dramatically shorter as growth procedes (tested at 24h after germination).
Cuticular defects. Resistant to Botrytis cinerea.
cvp2-1 mutants have defective foliar vascular patterning due to a reduced recruitment of cells into vascular tissue. cvp2-1 cotyledons have an aberrant open reticulum, an increased number of free vein endings, and vascular islands. cvp2-1 leaves have abnormal secondary, tertiary, and quarternary venation patterns. IP3 levels are increased in cvp2-1 seedlings and these mutants are hypersensitive to ABA in a seed germination assay.
cyn-1 seedlings are more sensitive to cyanate stress than wild type seedlings based on root growth assays in the presence of KCNO.
cyn-7 seedlings are more sensitive to cyanate stress than wild type seedlings based on root growth assays in the presence of KCNO.
Cytokinin-induced inhibition of adventitious root formation similar to that observed with wildtype.
Cytokinin-induced partial inhibition of cell division and greening of hypocotyl-derived calli.
Cytokinin insensitive (no inhibition of growth compared to wildtype).
Cytokinin insensitivity.
cZR and cZRMP are almost undetectable in this mutant.
DAB staining (H2O2 visualization) greatly reduced compared to wild-type.
Dark- and light-grown strong mutant seedlings have short hypocotyls of similar length.
Dark green, deeply lobed, highly serrated leaves. Leaves were 5 times larger than WT. Slow leaf growth. Delayed flowering. Lamina cell size is reduced.
Dark grown hypocotyls have reduced length compared to wild type. Root cells appear swollen and have abnormal radial expansion. Epidermal cells bulge. Cotyledon and hypocotyls are smaller and thicker than wild type. Cellulose microfibrils are randomly oriented.
Dark-grown mutant hypocotyls accumulate ectopic lignin.
Dark-grown mutant lines occasionally exhibit severe cell expansion and adherence defects such that in some instances cells tear out of the  epidermal tissue layer and bend away from the surface.
Dark-grown mutant seedlings are transferred to the light, a significant portion of the seedlings are unable to green and will bleach out and die.
Dark-grown mutants exhibit short hypocotyls and open, expanded cotyledons similar to light-grown mutant and wild-type seedlings, and accumulate high levels of anthocyanin. In addition, mutants  develop chloroplasts in the dark, express high levels of light-inducible genes, although grown in darkness, and die after the seedling stage in light and darkness.
Dark grown seedlings have shorter hypocotyls and reduced apical hook curvature. In white light, mutants have shorter hypocotyls indicating an enhanced inhibition of hypocotyl elongation. Late flowering in long days. Reduced chlorophyll accumulation.
Dark grown seedlings have shorter hypocotyls characteristic of de-etiolated seedlings. Roots are  highly branched. Plants have short stature and are sterile. Seeds abort.
Dark-grown seedlings homozygous for weak copl mutations have longer hypocotyls than their light-grown siblings and light-grown wild-type  seedlings, although they are clearly shorter than etiolated wild-type seedlings.
Dark grown seedlings on sirtinol have both long primary roots and long hypocotyls.  More resistant to 2,4-D and IAA than single mutants in both light and dark.  The ethylene resistant root phenotype of arf19-101 is enhanced by arf7-201.
Decreased ABA responsiveness in seed germination and primary root growth.
decreased accumulation of PSII; drastically decreased level of the in vivo phosphorylation of PSII core proteins
Decreased ammonium influx.
Decreased amounts of reduced ascorbate in leaves. Defective in xanthophyll cycle. Decreased protection from excess absorbed light energy through thermal dissipation.
Decreased fertility compared to wild type.
Decreased Fv/Fm ratio (variable fluorescence/maximum fluorescence).
Decreased germination efficiency under normal postimbibition conditions. Dormancy is alleviated by a 4-day chilling period. The efficiency of germination increases with the length of time the seeds are chilled.
Decreased germination on high concentrations of glucose and sorbitol.
Decreased germination when grown in the presence of ABA.
decreased leaf growth and CO2 fixation; impaired flower development and iron transport in the floral stalk.
Decreased levels of isopentenyladenosine riboside (iPR) and isopentenyladenosine monophosphate (iPRMP) compared to wild type.
Decreased mRNA levels of the floral repressors FLC and MAF4 and increased mRNA levels of the floral activators FT and SOC1.
decreased nitrate content in seeds
Decreased number of lateral roots. Enhanced acropetal auxin transport.
Decreased number of vascular initials.
Decreased organ size and fertility.
Decreased pedicel length.
Decreased rate of germination in the presence of ABA.
Decreased root elongation and decreased dry weight for plants grown under low water potential conditions.
Decreased root length (67% of that of wildtype) when grown on D-galactose-free medium.
Decreased sensitivity to ABA in a root elongation assay with respect to wild type.  The response was consistently approximately 10% less than the wild-type response.
Decreased sensitivity to ABA induced lateral root inhibition. Increased sensitivity to osmotic and salt stress. Increased ABA tolerance.
Decreased sensitivity to salt stress. In the presence of 100-150 mM NaCl seed germination,  root elongation, and seedling growth were less inhibited than wild type. Earlier flowering under long days.
Decreased susceptibility to Agrobacterium-mediated transformation.
Decreased thermotolerance.
Decreased xyl and glucuronic acid in stems.
Decreased xyl and glucuronoxylan content in stems.
Decrease in &#946;-carotene level.
decrease in 18:2 and 18:3 polyunsaturated fatty acids and a concomitant  increase in 18:1 relative to wildtype
Decreasein amounts of H3K9me2 in chromocenters
Decrease in cell number of 30-60% with respect to the wild type in the first leaves. Palisade cells are 1.5 to 2-fold larger in size than wild type.  Leaf area is slightly reduced compared to parental single mutants.
Decrease in levels of bioactive GA4.
Decrease in mean size.
Decrease in SCF<sup>TIR1</sup> ligase activity.
Decrease in the abundance of inner membrane complexes of mitochondria.
Decrease in the total chlorophyll content and the chlorophyll a/b ratio compared to wild type.
Decrease of macronutrients concentration in the MS salt formulation to 1/20X results in a substantial reduction in primary root growth.
Decrease root length (54% of that of wildtype) when grown on D-galactose-free medium.
Decreases in free-base iP and tZ are moderate compared to those of the riboside and ribotide forms.
defect in basal and acquired thermotolerance
Defect in cell division in the root and lower hypocotyl region soon after the embryo torpedo stage.
Defect in elongation of hypocotyl, roots, and cotyledons in dim light (15 &mu;mol/m2/s).
Defect in floral organ morphology.: dramatic reduction in length of pistil, stamen and petal development arrested, and striking reduction in the elongation of the pedicel.
Defect in sperm cell formation.  Generative cell does not undergo mitosis. Produces a single larger diploid sperm cell that is unable to perform fertilization.
Defect in symbiotic interaction with the endophytic fungus Piriformospora indica.
defect in thermotolerance
Defective chloroplast import.   Does not survive if grown on MS media without sucrose.   In soil, aci2-1 had a small stature with dark  green pigmentation. Rosette size was half that of the parent  line. Leaves were reduced in length and width, serrated and  fewer in number.Leaf protoplasts from had significantly more chloroplasts  per cell than the parental line.   aci2-1 also accumulated lipid droplets and large  starch grains. Chloroplasts  appeared smaller in aci2-1 than in the parental line.
Defective chloroplasts. In siliques of heterozyotes appproximately 25% of ovules are white. Plastids of homozygotes are defective.
Defective cotyledon development phenotypes at incomplete penetrance, including monocotyledonous seedlings, seedlings with partially fused cotyledons, tricots or various tricot fusion combinations.   The inappropriate cotyledon development leads to alterations of leaf phyllotaxy.
Defective cytokinesis was found in embryo,  most frequently during the first or second division after fertilization: these embryos were rod- or club-shaped and contained multiple nuclei that were not separated by cell walls.
defective DNA methylation; altered levels of 24-nt sRNA.
Defective female gametophytes.
Defective in acquired thermotolerance. Plant growth and development, seed set and fertility, and germination of harvested seeds are the same as wild type in the absence of stress (normal growth conditions).
defective in asymmetric stomatal lineage divisions
Defective in both mitochondrial and plastid gene expression.
Defective in chloroplast accumulation and division. Reduced number of chloroplasts and affected division plane in chloroplast biogenesis. Highly enlongated and multiple arrayed chloroplasts in developing green tissues.  Mutant proteins do not form homodimers, as wt proteins do, and localize aberrantly inside chloroplasts.
Defective in chloroplast accumulation in response to low light and chloroplast relocation under high light.
defective in chloroplast division
Defective in chloroplast protein import; chloroplasts have reduced import efficiency compared to wild type; import of both the stromal protein RBCS and the thylakoid lumenal protein plastocyanin is reduced; pale-green leaves.
Defective in chloroplast relocation.
Defective in directional cell elongation processes; abnormal cortical microtubule function; exhibits right-handed helical growth in roots and etiolated hypocotyls; epidermal cell files of roots are twisted to form right-handed helices; on vertically oriented hard agar plates, roots grow to the right when viewed from above the agar plates; this skewed root growth is driven by the friction between agar surface and helical epidermal cell files; phenotype is enhanced under the conditions that accelerate cell elongation, under such conditions, epidermal cells undergo isotropic cell expansion, resulting in spherically shaped cells protruding from the organ surface.
Defective in floral organ identity and organ number; late-arising flowers exhibited more severe phenotypes than early-arising flowers; in the late-arising flowers, the organ number in whorls 2 and 3 is reduced; on average, only 3 organs are found in whorl 2, and 5 organs in whorl 3; 7% of whorl 1 organs display partial homeotic transformation and possess sepal/petal or sepal/carpel mosaics; whorl 2 organs are most often narrow petals, but stamenoid petals were occasionally observed; alternatively, petals can be replaced by filamentous or tubular structures; whorl 3 stamens are typically reduced slightly in size; the whorl 4 gynoecium is often slightly split at the top; sometimes, horn-like protrusions are seen at the gynoecium apex. Narrow floral organs; narrow leaves; reduced plant height (semi dwarf); increased lateral branching; reduced number of seeds per silique.
Defective in greening after a prolonged period of dark growth. Defective in coupling nuclear and plastidic gene expression, and in establishing photoautotrophic growth.
Defective in interstrand cross link repair.
defective in iron translocation; chlorotic plants; expression of iron deficiency responses under conditions of iron sufficiency; overaccumulation of iron and other metals (plants accumulate approximately two-fold excess iron, four-fold excess manganesse and two-fold excess zinc in their shoots); detached roots are capable of repressing iron uptake responses when cultured under iron-sufficient conditions; when shoots are appropriately supplied with iron, they regreen and the plants are capable of correctly regulating root iron uptake responses; isolated protoplasts have lower iron levels than those from wild type plants; plants accumulate abnormal levels of ferric iron in their root vasculature, FRD3 is expressed in the pericycle and other vascular cylinder cells in the mature portion of the root; lacks trichomes on stems and leaves.
Defective in lateral root initiation as well as in root and hypocotyl growth; root growth less sensitive to low concentrations of IAA.
Defective in long-term acquired thermotolerance. When seedlings were exposed to heat stress at 37C followed by a long recovery time of 2 days then exposed to 45C, rof1 mutants could not cope with the severe heat stress exposure at 45C while the wild type plants showed tolerance to such treatment under the same condition.
Defective in maintenance of FLC activity in nonvernalized plants.  Undetectable FLC mRNA expression. Early flowering under short day photoperiods.
Defective in meiotic double strand break formation.  Fewer chiasmata formed per cell compared to the wild type cells.
Defective in NDH activity as evidenced by a suppression in the transient increase in fluorescence level after actinic light illumination that occurs in wild-type plants.
Defective in non-CG methylation
Defective in petal development; petals are transformed to filamentous organs, or lost; ovules have shorter integuments than those of wild type, producing shorter siliques; reduced fertility; strong allele.
Defective in phylloquinone biosynthesis.
Defective in pollen development.
Defective in pollen tube guidance and growth leading to reduced fertility. Decreased responsiveness to pollen tube attractant LURE1.2.
Defective in POR B uptake into chlorolasts
Defective in regulation of stomatal pore size. Increased stomatal pore opening in light and dark.
defective in RNA editing; defective in postillumination reduction of the plastoquinone pool;
defective in R protein-mediated defense response
Defective in sepal, petal, and ovule development; flowers sometimes produce more than four sepals and exhibit fusion between adjacent sepals; petals are often reduced in size or altered  in appearance, petals often absent or replaced by staminoid organs and filaments; altered integument growth in ovules; reduced fertility.
Defective interfascicular fiber cells in infloresnce stems. Decrease in cell wall synthesis, reduction in cell elongation, and  alteration in the normal organization of the actin cytoskeleton. Global change in plant architecture.
Defective in the formation of hybrid and complex N-glycans. Viable and fertile and do not show any obvious phenotype  under standard growth conditions.
Defective in xylem transport of nitrate from root to shoot. Morphologically WT when grown on soil. When grown on plates, roots were shorter than WT
Defective pollen development.
Defective quiescent center (QC) cellular organization resulting from deregulated QC cell division.
Defective thermotolerance. Plants treated at 38C are not able to acclimate to 45C temperature.
Defects are specific to pollen. Pollen tectum formation is perturbed. Tectum is broken, exposing the baculae. Overall swize, shape and fertility of pollen grains were comparable to WT.
Defects are specific to pollen exine structure. Smaller mesh size in the exine structure. Increased number of baculae. Fully fertile.
Defects in apical-basal gynoecium patterning (similar to ett and mp mutants). Mutant plant gynoecia had shorter ovaries and longer gynophores than the wild type, but the total length of the gynoecium is normal before pollination. After pollination, the gynoecium of failed to elongate, resulting in shorter siliques which contained arrested seeds, resulting in lower fertility. The stv1-1 ovules had shorter integuments than wild-type ones, and in some extreme cases, the gametophyte was protruding from the integuments. Mutant plants had defects in vascular system and embryo organization, which are also associated with auxin signaling. Most cotyledons in mutant plants had abnormal vascular patterns that were asymmetric and/or disconnected. Cotyledons were occasionally fused or single, indicating that stv1-1 is associated with defects in embryo patterning. Growth was retarded in both aerial and underground parts of stv1-1 mutants, resulting in plants that were smaller overall than the wild type. In stv1-1 roots, growth rates were reduced, while leaves were smaller than wild-type ones and pointed. These phenotypic observations suggested that STV1 had pleiotropic effects on whole-plant development in addition to specific effects on organs and tissues affected by known auxin signaling mutations.
Defects in cotyledon development.
Defects in cotyledon development.  Frequently exhibited hyponastic growth of cotyledons.
Defects in cotyledon greening under 100mM sucrose in growth medium, also with glucose or fructose but not mannitol.
Defects in embryonic cell patterning in essentially all double mutants.  Pleotropic cotyledon phenotypes.  Large increase in phenotypic penetrance.
Defects in lateral root formation, delayed root elongation and delayed plant growth. Reduced cell size.
defects in organ separation as a result of abnormal cell division and expansion during early boundary formation
Defects in pollen tube guidance, manifesting as polytuby or pollen tube failure.
Defects in root development. Short roots and sometimes even no roots.Ectopic cell divisions in the roots and disorganized cells and cell files.
Defects in seed dormancy and ABA mediated inhibition of germination.Resistant to high nitrate concentrations.
Defects in tapetal cell wall degradation and tapetal protoplast degeneration during tapetum development.  Microspores are either degraded or shrunken and vacuolated.  Callose dissolution and exine formation in anther development are also affected.
Defects in the photoperiod pathway.
defects in vacuolar trafficking of soluble cargo proteins
Defect specific to pollen exine layer. Abnormal baculae distribution. Higher number of baculae than WT. Tectum barely visible and nexine I looks discontinuous. A thick layer between nexine I and plasma membrane, where nexine II and intine will form, was also observed. Some distorted pollen grains observed. Fully fertile.
Defect specific to pollen exine layer. Dense baculae and a small, fractured tectum. Some pollen grains were distorted. pollen is fully fertile
Defense marker genes SAG13, FMO and PR1 are very strongly expressed in the mutant. Ethylene-induced genes PR3 and EFR1 were induced, whereas PDF1.2 was not.
deficiencies in post-transcriptional regulation of PIN genes. Defects in auxin-controlled growth responses as well as root and shoot development
Deficiency in homologous recombination in somatic cells but only after induction by genotoxic stress.
Deficient in floral organ abscission. Petals, sepals and filaments are retained indefinitely.
deficient in glutamate dehydrogenase; conditional phenotype: impaired root growth and mild shoot chlorosis under intermediate/high inorganic nitrogen conditions, this is exagerated when plants are grown in high concentrations of inorganic nitrogen under suboptimal conditions( e.g. without vitamins); seedling growth is specifically retarded on media containing exogenously supplied inorganic nitrogen.
deficient in photosynthesis, thylakoid membrane system degraded.
deficient in starch, no other phenotypic effect.
deformed endosomes and protein storage vacuoles; aggregated endomembranes; swelled and electron-dense extracellular space; defects of growth axis of embryo
Delayed bolting. Reduced copper accumulation. Reduced iron accumulation.
Delayed browning of the seed coat. At maturity, seed coat is pale-brown.
Delayed development,semi-dwarf growth habit, and formation of aberrant rosettes.  The rosette and cauline leaves are severely twisted along the proximodistal axis, leading to a downward curvature of the lateral edges toward the abaxial leaf surface. Cross sections of leaves showed an increased protrusion of mesophyll cell files around the vascular bundles.  The root system is greatly reduced, because elongation of primary roots is inhibited. Seedlings develop several side roots and secondary root branches.
Delayed developmentally determined browning of the seed coat. At harvest, mutant seed has pale brown seed coat with dark-brown chalazal zone. Mutant seeds accumulate more epicatechin monomers and more soluble proanthocyanidins than wild-type seeds. Flavonol composition was also affected in mutant seeds, which exhibited a higher ratio of quercetin rhamnoside monomers versus dimers than wild-type seeds. After 6-12 month storage, mutant seed coat gradually turned brown until the color resembled the wild type.
Delayed development of stomata on valves and style.
Delayed flowering, delayed senescence, delayed fruit dehiscence, reduced fertility, short stamens, elongated carpels.
Delayed flowering.
Delayed flowering both in long- and short-days growth conditions.
Delayed flowering in long days. Plants produce (on average) almost twice as many leaves before bolting as wild type.
Delayed germination , pale green leaves, reduced root growth and reduced seed weight. Reduced chlorophyll content, abnormal chloropasts with fewer stacked membranes and reduced size of prolamellar body.
Delayed germination. Exogenous GA3 can rescue the germination phenotype. Expression of AtGA20ox3 transcript is reduced in mutants.
Delayed germination. Small anthers and reduced pollen. Over 50% of the pollen is aborted early in mitosis (phenotype observable as early as pollen mitosis I).
Delayed germination. Time to germination can be increased by 50%. Overall germination rate is not affected but the process is delayed. The effect is further enhanced under temperature or oxidative stress conditions.
Delayed growth,short roots, multiply branched root hairs.Radially expanded root and hypocotyl cells.Aberrant microtuble organization and resistance to oryzalin.
Delayed growth and flowering. Reduced organ size and reduced apical dominance.
Delayed growth compared to wildtype.
Delayed growth compared to wildtype (stronger phenotype than in single mutant atisa3-2).
Delayed growth during later stages of development.
Delayed growth rate; reduced apical dominance; small, curled leaves; late flowering;delayed senescence.
Delayed in development: smaller in size and bolt and flower later than wild-type plants.
Delayed leaf  senescence, slightly shorter petioles, round and enlarged  leaves, an increased number of inflorescences, a late flowering  phenotype and increased biomass.
delayed leaf senescence; chlorophyll content and the  photochemical efficiency of photosystem II (Fv/Fm) physiological  markers of leaf senescence, were maintained at  higher levels in the ore12-1 mutant with age of the leaves; chlorophyll a/b-binding protein (CAB) gene and a senescenceassociated  gene SAG12 were expressed at higher and lower  levels, respectively; mutation greatly delayed dark-induced leaf senescence
Delayed leaf senescence.
Delayed leaf senescence. Delayed loss of chlorophyll and photochemical efficiency. Slower increases in membrane leakage than WT.
Delayed maturation and shedding of lateral root cap cells. The root cap extends into the differentiation zone.
delayed seed germination, seedlings exhibited growth arrest shortly after germination. The seedling lethal phenotype could be rescued with added sucrose, however the seedlings required several weeks to establish photosynthetic competence with provided sucrose.
Delayed seed germination- even greater than in atlig6-1 alone.
Delayed up to 3 wks in flowering versus wild type.  Strong curly leaf phenotype at later stages of development.  Total leaf number in rosette is 17-21 versus 10-13 in the wild type.
delay in flowering
Delay in flowering induction.
Delay in flowering intermediate between that observed in the two parental single mutants.
Delay in flowering time.
Delay in growth when grown under normal conditions. No significant morphological differences in leaves, roots, stems and flowers between mutant and wildtype.
Delay in rate of leaf formation. Longer plastochrone.
Derepression of SUP gene silencing (induced by clk-st), leading to plants with a wildtype  floral phenotype.
Derived from Weigel Activation tagged line- . Mutants have fewer and shorter cortical microtubule arrays.
Despite no apparent defect in DNA double-strand breaks formation in asy1, DNA cross-over  formation is severely compromised.
Despite responding to 4 wk of cold, Var-2-6 and Ull-2-5 still flowered late after >6 wk of cold; i.e., the vernalization response was relatively slow.
det3/pom1 double mutants were severely compromised with respect to plant growth and development. Many of the det3/pom1 double mutants died before bolting
Detached leaves maintained in permanent darkness accumulate a faint red-orange coloration after 5 to 7 days, which differs from wild type where a progressive yellowing of the leaves is observed. This red coloration is not observed under normal senescence.
Detached leaves of lcr were apparently able to obtain the required water and mineral nutrients through the sutures with contacting leaves, suggesting that the lipid boundary at the exterior epidermal cell walls in lcr-3P77 mutants becomes permeable or may even disappear upon fusion.
developed more emergent (stage VIII) and lateral roots at 10 d. has a moderate increase in the length of the primary root.
developmental arrest of mutant embryos occurs at variable globular stage; white seeds; white embryo; 23.1% mutant; 50.3% aborted seeds in top half of silique.
developmental defects in the tapetum at anther stage 4 and later.
Development of ectopic ovules with random distribution: 1 to 10 per gynoecium.
Development of flowers in the axils of first-whorl organs.
Development of the female gametophyte is abnormal.
Development-related lesion-mimic phenotype, occuring at a presenescent stage.
Develops between two and four branch points.
Develops metaxylem as wildtype plants.
develops spontaneous lesions resembling those produced during a pathogen-induced rapid cell death response (the hypersensitive response, HR); typical HR characteristics occur both within the necrotic tissue and within the healthy part of the plant, including: modification of plant cell walls, resistance to bacterial pathogens and accumulation of defense-related gene transcripts, the signal  molecule salicylic acid and an antimicrobial compound.
Develops subtle growth abnormalities: slight early flowering and diminished inhibition of hypocotyl growth under red or far-red light.
Diminished growth after leaf emergence, abnormal leaf morphology, ectopic floral development, sterile. Large starch deposits within the chloroplasts of leaf mesophyll cells.
Diminution of ion leakage.
Diminution of ion leakage (greater even than that of atrbohD).
diploid pollen grains
Displays more sensitivity to toxic cations than control plants, both as seedlings grown in vitro, and as plants grown in soil.
Displays peroxisomal defects such as reduced sensitivity to exogenously applied IBA.  Fewer lateral roots after IBA treatment.  Not generally defective in auxin responses.   Hypocotyl is not markedly shorter than WT when grown without added sucrose in the dark. PTS2-tageed proteins are not efficiently imported into the peroxisome.
Displays secondary lateral root branching (not seen in wild-type).
Displays the same profile of polymerization (DP) as the corresponding be2 or be3 mutant.
Disrupted in the ability to sense acetate.
Distorted Ds segregation and reduced seed set. Defects in embryogenesis, embryo sac development and pollen competence.
DNA fragmentation was undetectable in most cells.
Does not accumulate protoporphyrin IX in the presence of acifluorfen whilst wildtype accumulates up to three times more than in the absence of the herbicide.
Does not contain any 24-methyl-&Delta;22-sterols.
Does not exhibit any obvious increase in  its susceptibility to wilting.
Does not exhibit signs of ectopic growth in the carpels. Morphological aberrations exist throught the plant.
Does not express MUTE transcripts.
Does not produce lateral roots from the primary root. However, 10 days after germination, lateral roots are formed at the upper part of the hypocotyl rather than at the root-hypocotyl junction.
Does not produce reactive oxygen species in response to extracellular ATP stimulus.
Does not produce seeds.
Does not produce unbranched trichomes.
Does not undergo stem elongation.
Dominant, auxin-insensitive mutant that displays neither hypocotyl gravitropism nor phototropism, fails to maintain an apical hook as an etiolated seedling, and is defective in  lateral root formation.
dominant mutation, Cotyledons of heterozygous plants were pale and showed areas of bleaching. Homozygous plants had bleached cotyledons and, at most, produced two to four bleached leaves.
Do not display altered sensitivity for inhibition of root growth by osmotic stress compared to wild-type.
Dormant seeds.  Lack peroxisomal citrate synthase.  Cannot mobilize triacyglycerols due to a block in fatty acid beta-oxidation.
dot1-1 mutants display an open-class leaf and cotyledon venation patterning defect with low penetrance. Post-genital fusions of aerial organs also occur in dot1-1 mutants, and they produce cup-shaped leaves with a reduced number of trichomes. Normal epidermal cell wall formation is disrupted at the site of the organ fusions. These mutants have reduced water permeability compared to wild type plants, but they have normal levels of fertility and normal patterns of root and stem development.
dot2-1 mutants are dwarved plants that display an aberrant spurred leaf venation pattern and fail to flower. They also have an abnormal cotyledon number, shorter petioles, significantly shorter roots and smaller rosettes when compared to wild-type plants.
dot2-2 is phenotypically indistinguishable from dot2-1 but is homozygous sterile
dot3-1 mutants are dwarfed plants that have a parallel venation pattern defect in their leaves and abnormal vein loop patterns in their cotyledons. Primary root growth is significantly inhibited in dot3-1 mutants, but, they can produce lateral and adventitious roots.
dot3-2 mutants are dwarved plants with reduced fertility compared to wild type Arabidopsis plants.
dot4-1 mutants have an aberrant midgap leaf and cotyledon venation pattern and their roots are slightly shorter than wild type roots.
dot4-2 is phenotypically indistinguishable from dot4-1.
dot5-1 mutants have a misaligned venation defect in their leaves and cotyledons. Their phenotypes may vary somewhat, but dot5-1 mutants often have shorter roots and delayed leaf initiation compared to wild-type seedlings. They also have an abnormal petiole length and phyllotaxy. Apical dominance is reduced in dot5-1 mutants, and they appear to be hypersensitive to an application of the polar auxin transport inhibitor NPA.
Double homozygote are difficult to recover and may die very early in embryogenesis. Plants that do form are reduced in size with mature plants as small as single leaves. The inflorescence bears few flowers consisting of only carpels.
Double homozygotes are embryo lethal.  Double heterozygotes have short siliques and a reduced seed set.
Double homozygotes not obtained because of male gametophytic defect.
Double homozygous mutant seedlings are completely deficient in RUB-modified CUL1.
Double homozygous progeny has severe growth and developmental defects. The phenotype of these plants resembled the bdl/iaa12 and mp/arf5 mutants. These seedlings did not segregate at the expected 1/16 ratio. Instead, we identified three double mutant seedlings in 176 F2 plants, suggesting the homozygous double mutants are arrested during embryogenesis.
Double mutant, reduced seed dormancy determined by the embryo; ability to germinate as freshly harvested seeds; lack of additive effect of each of the individual monogenic mutants; single mutants show rather different pleiotropic effects; high capacity to germinate in darkness.
Double mutant, reduced seed dormancy determined by the embryo; increased ability to germinate as freshly harvested seeds compared to each of the monogenic mutants; cumulative effect of the individual mutations suggest that they control different pathways; high capacity to germinate in darkness.
Double mutant displayed extremely small valves, and very large, rough and distorted repla, indicating a strong enhancement of the phenotypes of the two single mutants both in valves and replum.
Double mutant displays defects in pollen tubes. Tubes are wider and bulge out indicating a defect in polarity maintenance. Pollen tubes are also shorter.
Double mutant displays  only mild growth phenotypes under nonstress conditions, but germination, growth, and survival are severely affected under  high salinity stress.
Double mutant displays pentamerous flowers typical of PAN mutants but also displays defects in later stages of petal development.
Double mutant enhances the effect of SYP22 single mutant. Increased leaf serration and dwarfism.
Double mutant enhances the SAM phenotype. 80% of double mutants show shoot termination after germination and production of the first two sets of leaves. Shoots regenerate at a low frequency.
Double mutant exhibits increased tolerance to arsenic throughout the lifespan of the plant with no visible alteration in plant growth and development.
Double mutant flowered later than the soc1 single mutant, and this delay was more pronounced in SD (additional 15 leaves) than in LD (additional two leaves).
Double-mutant flowers have a phenotype that is similar to ufo-11 flowers.
Double mutant had a sizable reduction in overall fertility (17% wild-type seed set), along with significant variations in individual fruit size and seed yield. Seed distribution was biased toward the apical half of the carpel, but substantial fertilization also occurred in the basal half.
Double mutant has approximately the same proportion of two-branched and unbranched trichomes as the gl-3 single mutant.
Double mutant has the same phenotype as the ufo-2 single mutant. There is no increase in the number of filaments and/or staminoid organs in the double mutant as compared with ufo-2.
Double mutant i4g1/i4g2 knockout plants show reduced germination rates, slow growth rates, moderate chlorosis, impaired fertility and reduced long term seed viability. Double mutant plants also exhibit altered responses to dehydration, salinity, and heat stress. The i4g2 and i4g1/i4g2 double mutant has reduced amounts of chlorophyll a and b suggesting a role in the expression of chloroplast proteins. General protein synthesis did not appear to be affected as the levels of gross protein expression did not appear to change in the mutants.
Double mutant inflorescences displayed slightly enhanced phenotypes compared with those of either single mutant.
Double mutant is male gametophytic lethal due to defects in pollen development. Phenotype of the double mutant pollens became apparent in the bicellular stage. The cytoplasm was less dense and plastids were dilated and lacked oil droplets. The nuclear envelope structure was modified by the formation of vesicles between the inner and outer membranes. The microspores lacked the intine layer, and consequently lacked clearly defined ER and Golgi.
Double mutant is phenotypically indistinguishable from either single mutant.
Double mutant leaves were identical to those of the prpl11-1 single mutant in terms of thylakoid protein composition and photosynthetic performance.
Double mutant of BAS1 and SOB both of which are null alleles. Less responsive to light as measured by hypocotyl elongation and enhanced cotyledon expansion in red, blue and far red light meaning they are less responsive. Early flowering. Increased levels of 6-deoxotyphasterol and cataseterone, which are products of the brassiolide pathway.
Double mutant plants are viable but the pollen has reduced fitness, and they showed slowed plant growth, modified seed shape, and high accumulation of anthocyanins. Seedlings are not hypersensitive to oxidant stresses
Double mutant plants displayed an enhanced cauline leaf outgrowth phenotype compared with bop1-4 plants.
Double mutant plants have narrow leaves and developed ectopic outgrowths on their abaxial lamina.
Double mutant plants showed a short-root phenotype: roots grew like the wild-type roots until 6 d after germination (DAG). However, after 7 DAG, the elongation of the double mutant roots was dramatically reduced compared with the wild-type roots. The aerial organs (leaves, rosettes, inflorescences, flowers, fruits, and embryos) developed normally in the double mutant plants.
Double mutant pollen tubes cease their growth and burst in vitro and fail to reach the female gametophytes in vivo.
Double mutant restores sensitivity to BR caused by bri1-9 mutation. bri1-9 accumulated a higher level than the parental bri1-9 mutant. Caused largely by attenuated degradation rather than by increased biosynthesis of bri1-9.
Double mutant roots were significantly shorter than WT toots when under salt-stress.
double mutants are both male and female gametophyte lethal
Double mutants are defective in telomere maintainance. Mutants form anaphase bridges.
double mutant seedlings grown on zinc-deficient agar media showed a zinc-deficiency hypersensitive  phenotype, visible as very poor growth and strong chlorosis.
Double mutant seedlings were unable to catabolize seed storage lipids and accumulated long-chain acyl-CoAs. The acx1-1 acx2-1 seedlings were also unable to establish photosynthetic competency in the absence of an exogenous carbon supply, a phenotype that is shared with a number of other Arabidopsis mutants disrupted in storage lipid breakdown. Germination frequency of the double mutant was significantly reduced compared with wild-type seeds. This was unaffected by the addition of exogenous sucrose, but was improved by dormancy-breaking treatments such as cold stratification and after-ripening.  Peroxisomes in the cotyledons were enlarged in double mutants, while in single mutants (acx1-1 and acx2-1) peroxisomes were identical to the wild type.
Double mutants exhibits a clearly detectable delay in bolting time: plants had still not bolted by ~25 days after the mean bolting time of WT in LDs.
Double mutants had an increased number of sepals compared with either single mutant. In early arising flowers as many as eight sepals were present. In addition, fusion between sepals was observed in ant-4 rbe-3 mutants. Sepals in the double mutant were often fused along their entire length rather than just at their base as usually seen in rbe-3.
Double mutants have increased cellulose, Rha , Fuc, Ara, Xyl, Man, Glc, and Gal levels and  decreased GalA and homogalacturonan levels. Mutants are also more susceptible to specific Botrytis cinerea isolates.
Double mutants have more trichome branches than frc single mutant but fewer than nok single mutant.
Double mutant shows a strong de-etiolation defect. When grown in the light plants produce several pairs of small leaves but never transition to reproductive development. Modest enhancement of auxin response defect seen in eta2-1 single mutant.
double mutant shows dramatic and more than additive period lengthening in the light and becomes arrhythmic in constant darkness. Fails both to maintain an oscillation after entrainment to thermocycles and to reset its clock in response to cold pulses.
Double mutant shows increase in growth of 68% relative to acl5-1 single mutant. Also restores normal liginification.
Double mutants lacked hyper-fluorescent trichomes.
Double mutant suppresses leaf variegation due to var2 loss of function. First leaves are smaller with reduced cell size.
Double mutant suppresses leaf variegation due to  var2 loss of function. First leaves are smaller with reduced cell size.
Double mutants were indistinguishable from bps1 single mutants.
Double mutants were intermediate in mean size when compared with the corresponding single mutants.
double mutants were not able to produce seeds because of a lack of pollen  development in mutant anthers. In young buds, double mutant anthers developed normally, but serk1 serk2 microsporangia  produced more sporogenous cells that were unable to develop beyond meiosis. Furthermore, serk1 serk2 double mutants  developed only three cell layers surrounding the sporogenous cell mass, whereas wild-type anthers developed four cell layers.  Further confocal microscopic and molecular analyses showed that serk1 serk2 double mutant anthers lack development  of the tapetal cell layer, which accounts for the microspore abortion and male sterility.
Double mutant wrky54 wrky70 displays enhanced susceptibility to Psm ES4326 infection.
Double null homozygous mutant progeny invariably die at the seedling stage, do not express detectable CSN5 proteins, and are virtually identical to the null alleles of the cop/det/fus mutants.
Downward-curled leaf margins.
Downwards bending of cotyledons indicating differential growth in the adaxial and abaxial sides.
DP 6-7 and DP 5-9 chains are slightly decreased, whereas DP 10-16 chains are slightly increased (DP, degree of polymerization).
Dramatically reduced phototropic response.
Dramatically shorter hypocotyl compared to phyB-4 single mutant.  Adult plants have curled leaves lacking petioles and irregularly shaped siliques.
Dramatic dwarf and chlorotic phenotype when grown on soil and on axenic MS medium.
dramatic growth retardation; pale green to albino; flimsy roots with less branching; chloroplastic disorder.
Dramatic reduction in fiber wall thickness of a vessel member cells, a decrease in stem strength, and alteration of the overall growth were observed in mutated plants. Comparative analyses of cell wall polysaccharide fractions from fra8 and wild-type stems showed that the xylan and cellulose contents are drastically reduced in fra8, whereas xyloglucan and pectin are elevated. Inflorescence stems were shorter in height, and rosette leaves smaller in size. Mild wilty phenotype was sometimes found in greenhouse conditions.
Dramatic reduction in rosette radius and root length compared to wild type (87 and 74% reduction, respectively).
Drastic delay in flowering.  Plants do not start bolting until 30-40 days after germination vs. 21-26 days for the wild type.  All mutant plants eventually produce shoots with flowers and seeds comparable with those formed by wild type.  However, about 20% of the mutant seeds do not germinate.
drip1-1 drip1-2 double mutants are developmentally delayed and bolt, flower, and set seed later than wild type plants. However, their overall size can exceed that of wild type plants if they receive adequate water. The transcript profile of these mutants differs from wild type under normal conditions, and in response to dehydration stress. Levels of numerous stress-inducible transcripts are increased in the double mutant. In addition, the double mutants appear to be more tolerant to dehydration stress than wild type plants, based on ion leakage assays and recovery after dehydration stress experiments.
Dual phenotype, reduced chlorophyll content and gravicurvature-defective. Significant increase in anthocyanin content, abnormal chloroplasts, reduced photosynthetic capacity. Severely reduced lamellae lipid membranes in the plastids. The mutant plants have retarded growth phenotypes. The plastids of the mutant line had fewer stromal thylakoids, no grana, less starch grains and more densely stained, globular structures that likely represent plastoglobuli. Moreover, the resultant defects in chloroplast integrity undoubtedly lead to a dramatic decrease in the photosynthetic capacity, which consequently results in smaller plants and lower seed number. At the same time, abnormal chloroplasts and reduced photosynthetic capacity may create a nutritional stress response, which is marked by a significant increase in the anthocyanin levels. This finding is consistent with the observations that anthocyanins are induced by a number of environmental stresses.
Due to pollen germination defects, homozygotes cannot be obtained.
Due to pollen germination defects, homozygotes cannot be obtained. Pollen development is not affected.
During cFR irradiation, mutant seedlings were almost completely unresponsive compared to WT.
During early seedling growth, cotyledons were small and distorted, and only two leaf primordia were inittaited at the shoot apex. Dome-shape soot apical meristem was distorted. Root growth was inhibited, and root apex was swollen.
During early stages of development, the seedlings are chlorotic and smaller than wild-type.
During five generations of growth, both tert and atm/tert lose about 500 bp of chromosome length per generation. But, whereas tert mutants show no visible growth defects through the G6 generation, atm/tert mutants in G5 show severe growth defects, such as aberrant leaf shape, delayed flowering, a loss of apical dominance, and reduced fertility. atm/tert mutants in G5 have a much higher rate of bridged chromosomes than G5 tert mutants.
During germination, the onset of cell proliferation in root tips is significantly delayed and the overall numbers of dividing cells are reduced.  The delay in cell cycle activation is linked to delayed radicle emergence.
During silique maturation of heterozygous plants, some white seeds were visible, suggesting the absence of chlorophyll in the cotyledons of the homozygous seeds. However, after desiccation, the seed color heterogeneity was no longer visible.
During stage 3 of flower development, four sepal primordia are initiated in normal positions in rbe-3 mutants. However, early in stage 4 some rbe-3 sepal primordia have undergone extra growth along their margins and appear wider than normal. The tips of these primordia were sometimes not located in the middle of the primordia and the two sides of the primordia were not symmetrical. Continued uneven growth of these primordia became more pronounced during development. By stage 5, an organ that had presumably initiated as a single primordium now appeared as two fused primordia or two closely spaced and partially fused primordia.
During the first two to three DAG, the double homozygous mutant progeny display the typical  photomorphogenic phenotype of the fusca mutants.
During walking stick stage, aberrant embryo cells contained unusually large oilbodies not observed in WT seeds. Large oilbodies in some cases had 5 micrometers in diameter. Changes in the size of oilbodies caused disruption of storage organelles, altering accumulation of lipids and proteins and causing delay in germination.
Dwarf, curled leaves, increased accumulation of conjugated salicylide glucoside (SAG) and salicyclic acid (SA) under some conditions, constitutive expression of SA-induced genes, enhanced resistance to biotrophic pathogens.
Dwarf, delayed growth, short roots. Defective root hairs that are branched and swollen.Ectopic root hairs.In epidermal cells, cortical microtubules are bundled and disorganized.
dwarf, loss of apical dominance, fused cotyledons, reduced number of rosette leaves, curlier leaves with altered leaf margins
dwarf, slow growth
dwarf; elevated defense response; phenotype is temperature dependent.
Dwarf.  Accumulate a large amount of maltose and starch.  Have reduced levels of glucose-1-phosphate, glucose-6-phosphate and sucrose at night. Accumulate maltodextrin in the chloroplast.
Dwarf. Fertile but had 25% fewer seeds per silique than normal.  Sections through the dyc283 mutant root revealed polynucleate,  hypertrophied cortical and epidermal cells (n= 41). Hypocotyl and leaf primordia had  polynucleate cells and aberrant cell wall stubs. In some dyc283  mutant cells, the nucleus did not divide and curved around the  branched end of the cell wall stub. Abnormally large nuclei with additional nucleoli. In a subset of dyc283 mutant premitotic cells  , MTs were mixed with condensed chromosomes  during prometaphase. Some  dyc283 dividing cells had MT spindle defects. Phragmoplasts  were often misplaced or wavy. Incomplete nematode development due to a defect in  giant cell formation in the dyc283 mutant.
Dwarf.  Growth defect of the dark-grown hypocotyl.  Post-embryonic development ceases entirely at the seedling stage.  Cell wall polysaccharides with an altered monosaccharide composition: increased arabinose and glucose content in non-cellulosic polymers.  Cell elongation is reduced in both hypocotyls and roots.  Organization of the endodermis and pericycle cell layers of the hypocotyl is abnormal.  Cell division is not impaired.
dwarf. Increased salicyclic acid level.
Dwarf (growth under long-day photoperiod).
Dwarfed. Narrow leaves. Abaxialized leaf epidermis. Downward-curling leaves. Reduced number of secondary inflorescence shoots. Some lines have trumpet-shaped cotyledons or the shoot apical meristem terminates in a 'pin-like' structure. Missing axillary meristems in axils of cauline leaves.
Dwarfed. Small, asymmetric, lancet-shaped leaves (cotyledons unaffected). Early senescence of leaves, petals and sepals. Large stigma. Infertile. Over-accumulates starch and trehalose.
Dwarfed and chlorotic mutant plants.
Dwarf phenotype, early flowers are sterile while late flowers are fertile. Reduced silique length.
Dwarf phenotype.
Dwarf phenotype recognizable at a young seedling stage.
Dwarf plants, punctate pattern of cell death, accumulates salicylic acid and camalexin.
Dwarf plants defective in phenylpropanoid accumulation. Contains less sinapoylmalate than wild type siblings. Seed coats are yellow due to decreased flavonoid content.  Cell walls have reduced lignin levels (10-11% of wild type levels).
Dwarf plants  slightly early flowering, abnormal phyllotaxy.
Dwarf plants with reduced vigor, dies before expansion of the true leaves, necrotic lesions on cotyledons. When grew on agar plates, the double mutants displayed extended viability and developed into compact and epinastic rosette with small curled leaves and short petioles, however no bolting. Short roots on agar plate.
Dwarf plants with short hypocotyls in light and dark. Plants have dark green leaves with rounded blades, short stems and internodes,reduced apical dominance and delayed senscence. Seeds are smaller (shorter) that non- mutant siblings.  Mutants have reduced levels of endogenuos brassinosteroids.
Dwarf plant with reduced cell adhesion and 25% reduction in levels of galacturonate in its leaves.
dwarf plant with smaller and round-shape leaf, defect in apical dominance that resulted in simultaneous generation of multiple inflorescence, shorter anthers that often resulted in poor pollination
dwarf with crinkled leaves. conferred hyper-resistance to green peach aphid.
dwarf with short inflorescences, reduced axillary and secondary inflorescences, reduced numbers of rosette and cauline leaves which are smaller and curled
dysfunction in stomata closure
early chloroplast biogenesis mutant; lacks an organized thylakoid membrane; albino cotyledons; seedling lethal.
Early development of lateral roots, often at the base of the hypocotyl. In the absence of vitamin B6, it was also observed that lateral roots frequently initiated closer to each other in comparison with the wild type.
early flowering
Early flowering, especially at 16 degrees C.  Almost identical flowering times at 23 degrees C and 16 degrees C, suggesting in insensitivity to changes in ambient growth temperature.
early flowering, leaf serration, production of extral petals, weak apical dominance.
Early flowering, normal stature and leaf morphology.
Early flowering, reduced fertility, aborted seeds.
Early flowering, reduced fertility, indehiscent anthers,increase petals, small carpels. In short days, leaves are smaller with serrated leaves. In long days the leaves are smaller.
early flowering; photoperiod-insensitive; long hypocotyl in light-grown seedlings; conditional circadian dysfunction; lacks trichomes on stems and leaves, some trichomes in leaf margins.
early flowering; photoperiod-insensitive; long hypocotyl in light-grown seedlings; conditional circadian dysfunction.
early flowering; photoperiod-insensitive; long hypocotyl in light-grown seedlings; lacks trichomes on stems and leaves, some trichomes in leaf margins.
early flowering; photoperiod-insensitive; long hypocotyl in light-grown seedlings.
early flowering; usually light green; somewhat curled leaves; bent siliques; reduced fertility.
Early flowering.
Early flowering almost identical to Col, which is a fri null, and did not display any other morphological alterations.
Early flowering compared to wild type.
Early flowering in both LD and SD, and in the Col genetic background also cause the leaf and flower phenotypes that are observed in elf7 and  elf8.
Early flowering in long and short days.
Early flowering in short and long days.
early flowering in short days
Early flowering in short days.
Early flowering phenotype. The lateral shoot branching capacity of the mutant plants was higher than that of wild-type plants. The mutant plants were about 30% shorter than the wild type in stature.
Early flower mutant phenotypes are lessened in later-arising flowers which appear more normal whilst still displaying significant perturbations of organ development.
Early germination compared to wild-type.
Early seedling growth was not affected in mutants. Later, mutant seedlings had shorter roots, and retarded lateral rot intiation. The polar growth of root hairs and stigmatic papillae is disturbed. Organs are generally smaller, plants show a loss of apical dominance and indeterminate growth where instead of floral meristems new lateral inflorescences are initiated in a reiterative manner. Mutant plants had dramatically reduced fertility.
early senescence; accumulation of high levels of reactive oxygen species.
Early termination of apical meristem at a variety of stages, vegetative and reproductive.
Ectopic adaxial tissues are restricted to the medial domain of the carpels, normally occupied by the abaxial replum.  Formation of external ovule-bearing placentae.
Ectopic expression of class I KNOX genes (KNAT1, KNAT2, STM, KNAT6). Ectopic meristems form on leaves. Abnormal flowers, abnormal phyllotaxy. Temperature and photoperiod sensitive.
Ectopic expression of seed storage proteins in leaves.
ectopic formation of trichomes on inflorescence stems and pedicels.
Ectopic stipules observed in cauline leaves of as1;axr1 plants are not found.  Leaves have an as1-like morphology.
edt1 mutant plants show enhanced drought tolerance due to overexpression of the HDG11 protein. edt1 mutants have a longer primary root with more lateral roots, and have a higher root biomass. They have larger epidermal cells and larger stomata, but a lower stomatal density. Nevertheless, they have higher levels of photosynthesis than WT seedlings. Mutant seedlings accumulate higher levels of ABA following PEG treatment, and show constitutively higher levels of Pro. Superoxide dismutase activity is also higher in edt1 mutants. Overexpression of HDG11 in tobacco also causes improved drought tolerance.
eer4 partially restores the ethylene responsiveness to the ein3-1 mutant. Exposure of the eer4;ein3-1 mutant to saturating levels of ethylene results in moderate hypocotyl inhibition along with the generation of a pronounced apical hook.
eer5-1 mutant hypocotyls show hypersensitivity to ethylene, but the hypocotyls grow similarly to wild type hypocotyls when etyhlene signaling is blocked using silver nitrate. eer5-1 mutant roots are shorter than wild-type roots when neither are subjected to ethylene treatment, but eer5-1 roots do not show altered sensitivity to ethylene. Transcript levels for certain ethylene-responsive genes are aberrant in the eer5-1 mutant. For instance, AtEBP expression is lower in eer5-1 than in WT dark-grown seedlings. But, EBF1 and EBF2 transcript levels are not altered in the mutant. Dark-grown eer5-1 seedlings do not produce significantly more ethylene than WT seedlings. Although EER5 can interact with members of the signalosome, EIN3 protein accumulation is not changed in eer5-1 mutants. Adult eer5-1 mutant plants resemble WT Col-0 plants.
eer5-2 mutant hypocotyls show hypersensitivity to ethylene, but the hypocotyls grow similarly to wild type hypocotyls when etyhlene signaling is blocked using silver nitrate.
eIF3e-Tp plants, that have increased levels of eIF3e transcripts and protein, have defects in floral organ development and undergo the transition to flowering later than wild-type plants, based on rosette leaf number. There are increased levels of AP1 transcripts and decreased levels of AP3 and PI transcripts in these mutants.
Elarged meristems, fasciated stems, reduced size/filamentous gynoecium, radialized leaves, reduced fertility.
Elevated gibberellin levels.
Elevated levels of maltose, hexose but not sucrose.
Elevated starch content at the end of the dark period.
elf6-1 mutants flower earlier than wild-type plants under long- and short-day conditions.
elf6-3 mutant seedlings do not have any obvious aberrant phenotypes under light-grown conditions, but they do have an early flowering phenotype. Adult plants have reduced cell elongation, manifested in a ~30% reduction in leaf petiole length, but their leaf width is similar to wild-type. The transcript levels of some BR-regulated genes are moderately reduced in elf6-3 mutants. H3K9me3 levels are elevated immediately upstream of the BR-responsive TCH4 gene in elf6-3 mutants.
elf6-3 mutants flower earlier than wild type plants under long- and short-day conditions.
elf6-4 mutants flower earlier than wild type plants under long- and short-day conditions
Elongated and downward curled leaves.  Precocious distribution of abaxial trichomes in early rosette leaves which implies accelerated vegetative phase change.
Elongated hypocotyl, dark green leaves, long and thick inflorescence stems, delayed senescence, elongated gynoecium and sepals, reduced fertility, defective anthesis, delayed abscission, larger seeds.
Elongated hypocotyls under short day growth.
Elongated mitochondria
Elongated mitochondria which sometimes form interconnected networks. Enlarged leaf peroxisomes. Elongated root peroxisomes.
elongated stems, elongated hypocotyls resulted from elongated epidermal and cortex cells, elongated pedicels resulted from elongated epidermal pavement cells and increased cortex cell numbers
Elongating parts of inflorescences are fragile.
embryo and seedling defective. Mutant plants had defects in both embryo and seedling development. Mutant seeds accumulate anthocyanin, are intolerant to desiccation, cotyledons did not curl, and had often fused along one side of their margins. Trichomes were formed on the cotyledons during embryogenesis, and the accumulation of storage proteins and lipids were reduced. Tan mutants die as embryos, but immature mutant seeds can be germinated in culture. However, tan mutant seedlings are defective in shoot and root development with stunted roots and hypocotyls that fail to elongate in the dark. True leaves rarely emerged and plants die at seedling stage.
Embryo defective; initiated cotyledons and continued growth and cell division beyond heart stage.  Embryos elongated and developed a clear hypocotyl, but featured dramatically stunted cotyledons.  Domed shoot apex.
Embryo-defective. Arabidopsis embryos carrying the domino1 mutation grow slowly in comparison with wild type embryos and as a consequence reach only the globular stage at desiccation.  Larger size of the nucleolus that can be observed soon after fertilization in the nuclei of both the embryo and the endosperm. The ultrastructure of mutant nucleoli is drastically different from wild type.
Embryo-defective phenotypes and lack of plasmodesmata aperture/size-exclusion limit downregulation after the torpedo stage.
Embryo fails to develop beyond the globular stage.  Consisten and severe developmental arrest at the mid-globular stage, resulting in a slightly irregular embryo proper consisting of 32-64 cells.  Arrested embryos persist in this early arrested stage into late-stage seeds, without any apparent further growth.
embryo lethal
embryo lethal, arrested developement at two-cell stage
Embryo lethal, due to major defects in embryo patterning.
Embryo lethal, embryos arrest at early heart stage.
Embryo lethal, embryos arrest at globular stage.
Embryo lethal, embryos not viviparous, cotyledons partially transformed into leaves, complex vascular pattern observed in cotyledons. Embryos are sensitive to abscisic acid. Mutant seeds were usually desiccation tolerant at maturity, although their viability was reduced slightly after several weeks of storage. Dry seeds often germinated to produce seedlings with distorted cotyledons. This defect resulted from degeneration of cotyledon tips prior to germination. Some trichomes form on cotyledons after germination and stomata are found on surface of cotyledons of mutant embryos The cotyledon surface on seedlings produced from dry seeds lacked trichomes (likely because any trichomes initiated during embryogenesis did not survive desiccation). Mutant seeds were consequently highly pigmented at maturity and anthocyanins were especially prominent in the top half of the mutant cotyledons. Mutant embryos do not form roots during the first 48 hours of culture. The pattern of storage product accumulation was altered, the hypocotyl was filled with mature protein bodies, while the cotyledons exhibited a gradient of starch and protein accumulation. Cells in the top half of mutant cotyledons were highly vacuolated, packed with starch grains, and lacked mature protein bodies, whereas cells closer to the hypocotyl contained less starch but many protein bodies. The accumulation of lipid bodies during embryogenesis was unusual too: distribution of lipid bodies was highly abundant in the hypocotyls of the mutant plants.
Embryo lethal, similar to aesp-2.
Embryo lethal; viviparous embryos with cotyledons partially transformed into leaves; embryos sensitive to abscisic acid; embryos have reduced hypocotyl, cotyledons that remain green late in development; reduced protein and lipid bodies with starch being predominant storage product in mutant embryos. Trichomes form on cotyledons after germination; internal cells of cotyledons enlarge, vacuolate and resemble leaf mesophyll cells; intercellular spaces are prominant in cotyledons; enlarged shoot apical meristem; stomata are found on surface of cotyledons of mutant embryos; mature seeds are desiccation intolerant, however, immature seeds can be rescued before silique drying and germinated to produce seedlings. Root apex is active in viviparous seeds; immature mutant embryos germinated prior to desiccation produce plants that appear normal for other characteristics.
embryo lethal.
Embryo lethal. Arrests at globular stage.
Embryo lethal. Embryo development was arrested before the globular stage.
Embryo lethal. Embryos arrest at globular stage.
embryo lethal. Embryos do not develop beyond the octant stage.
Embryo lethal.Mutant embryos look normal.
embryo lethality, mutant cells were variably enlarged, multinucleate and contained large vacuoles that accumulated inclusions staining pink with the pH-sensitive dye toluidine blue.  Cell wall deposition was also affected: think cell walls, local thickening and cell wall stubs.  In addition, Golgi stacks organization was impaired, the stacks were horseshoe-shaped, with large membrane vesicles accumulating nearby.
Embryo Lethality.  Embryo development arrests at heart stage.
Embryo lethal - not recovered.
Embryonic lethal in homozygotes.
Embryonic lethal in homozygotes. In heterozygous plants immature siliques  had approximately 22% white seeds, which  became purplish and shriveled as the siliques matured. Knockout embryos showed retarded growth and in most cases were able to  develop to the heart stage, but failed to grow further  into torpedo and mature embryos. Null embryos lacked peroxisomes, contained small and underdeveloped  plastids, and were missing characteristic lipid body structures.
Embryonic-lethal with deficient embryos arrested at early globular stage of development.  Mutant embryonic cells display a nucleolar hypertrophy.
Embryonic phenotype: altered pattern of cell division became pronounced in mutant embryos at the early globular stage. Abnormal, transverse cell division of the hypophysis and extra rounds of division of the suspensor cells. In the heart stage, most of the teb-1 embryos showed an asymmetric and misshaped morphology as well as an aberrant cell division pattern, especially in the hypophysis descendents in the root pole.
Embryo proper is unable to execute regulated divisions in reference to the choice of division plane and the timeing of the division, particularly longitudinal divisions of the plane of the apical-basal axis.
Embryos consistently initiated cotyledons and continued growth and cell division beyond heart stage.  Embryos consistently failed to elongate, developing instead as v-shaped embryos with wide,stunted cotyledons and no hypocotyl.
Embryos consistently initiated cotyledons and continued growth and cell division beyond heart stage.  Embryos develop slowly to a morphology resembling younger, narrow, somewhat pointed torpedo stage embryos with slightly stunted cotyledons.
embryos developed abnormally. Mutant zygotes divided more symmetrically than wild-type.
Embryos form cotyledons at the transition stage of embryogenesis that appear slightly stunted at later stages compared to wt embryos.
Embryos have enlarged apical cell with respect to wild type.
Endogenous ABA levels in fresh and dehydrated tissues of the mutant were about 23% and 2.4%, respectively, of those of the wild type plants.
Endogenous levels of 12 amino acids were at least 2-fold greater in wild-type than in the mutant plants after 18 h dehydration. Amino acids that exhibited marked increases were leucine (152-fold), isoleucine (95-fold), proline (83-fold) and valine (25-fold). Aspartic acid was the only amino acid which showed a significant reduction in wild-type plants during dehydration. In dehydrated tissues of the mutant, 9 amino acids increased more than 2-fold during dehydration, however the increases in the mutant plants were less pronounced than those in wild-type plants. Glycine and alanine showed greater increases in comparison to wild type, whereas the levels of glutamic acid and aspartic acid showed a reduction in the mutant during dehydration.
Endogenous levels of IAA and ABA are slightly higher than in wild type but differences were not significant.
Endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-associated degradation process is blocked and the unfolded protein response is activated in ebs5-5 mutant.
Endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-associated degradation process is blocked in hrd1a hrd1b double mutant.
Endosperm development is defective, cellularization of the endosperm is delayed.
Enhanced arsenic accumulation.
Enhanced cold induction and  reduced drought induction of stress genes. The mutant plants displayed less tolerance to salt and drought but enhanced  tolerance to freezing.
Enhanced disease resistance to bacterial and oomycete pathogens.
enhanced disease susceptibility to bacteria and fungi
enhanced drought tolerance
Enhanced drought tolerance. Hypersensitive to ABA inhibition  of light-induced stomatal opening. Loss of function of CIPK23 alters the ABA  responsiveness of guard cells during their opening and  closure, leading to reduced water loss under drought  conditions. When grown on media containing low levels of KCl (micromolar  range), cipk23 mutants displayed drastically reduced  stature compared to the wild-type. In particular, the roots of  mutant plants were significantly shorter than those of wildtype  plants.
Enhanced ethylene-response.  Largely phenocopies the etr1-7 null mutant.
Enhanced flower phenotype compared with both single mutant plants, reduction in floral organ number and enhanced carpelloidy of whorl 1 organs, whorl 2 organs are completely absent. Deregulation of AG and AP3 expression in floral meristem and floral organ primordia.
Enhanced formation of secondary vascular tissue in fascicular and interfascicular regions that exceeded the wild-type by 30%.
Enhanced gravitropic response,reduced basipetal auxin transport, increased salt tolerance.
Enhanced H2O2 accumulation.
Enhanced high-light phototropic response.
Enhanced meristem identity defect with respect to single lfy-10 mutant.  More secondary inflorescences formed, more bracts formed.  No enhancement of floral homeotic defects of lfy-10.
enhanced phenotype of pin1-5 single mutant, the valves of mutant gyneoecia were reduced and often fused along one of the margins.
enhanced phenotype of sty1-1, with aberrant style, only more pronounced defects compared to those seen in sty1-1 single mutant. In certain gynoecia this causes the formation of ridged epidermal style cells not only apically (as in the sty1-1 mutant) but also adaxially, on the inside of the gynoecium Stigmatic papillae develop along the edges of each lobe and from the adaxially positioned style cells. Sometimes, the stigmatic papillae are clustered together in lump-like structures. The amount of stylar and stigmatic tissues in each gynoecium of the double mutant is markedly reduced compared to wild type and to the sty1-1 single mutant. The septum is frequently absent from, or reduced in, the apical parts of the ovary. The broad abaxial replum observed in sty1-1 single mutants, is distinct also in sty1-1 sty2-1 double mutants. Also, the rosette and cauline leaves of the sty1-1 sty2-1 double mutant plants are more serrated than their wild-type counterparts and the sty2-1 single mutant leaves. The difference from wild type is most distinct before the leaves are fully expanded. The organization of the medial veins in double mutant gynoecia was altered compared to wild type, whereas the lateral bundles differentiated and terminated normally. The stylar xylem fans were further reduced or even absent. A basalized point of medial vein bifurcation, similar to that observed in the sty1-1 single mutant, was also evident.
Enhanced  quiescent center cell division and root distal stem cell differentiation.
Enhanced resistance to Psm ES4326 infection.
enhanced response to ABA-mediated inhibition of root growth
Enhanced root growth rate resulting in longer roots.
Enhanced sensitivity to methyl methanesulfonate and hydrogen peroxide
Enhanced susceptibility to both virulent and non-virulent strains of Pseudomonas.
Enhanced susceptibility to Pseudomonas syringae carrying avrRpm1.
Enhanced susceptibility to Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato.
Enhanced susceptibility to Psm ES4326 infection.
Enhanced susceptibility to virus, reduction in post-transcriptional gene silencing
Enhanced transpirational water loss.Impaired stomatal response to ABA and reactive oxygen.
Enhancement of phenotype observed for single mutant ahk3-7: Reduced ability to respond to cytokinin by callus or shoot formation.
Enhancement of phenotype observed in single mutant ahk3-7: Mutant seedlings grow better and form darker green leaves in the presence of elevated levels of cytokinins in medium. Increased cytokinin resistance
Enhancement of the inhibition of cytokinin-induced stimulation of cell division and greening of hypocotyl-derived calli compared to the responsed observed with CRE1 single mutants (e.g. cre1-10).
Enhancer trap of FH5, formin homology protein. Shows protein localization to cell plate, endosperm and chalazal cyst.No morphological phenotype described.
Enlarged apical dome, altered in shape  and often protruding (the mutant meristem therefore contains over 40% more cells.)
Enlarged meristems, extra floral organs,retarded growth and reduced stature
enlarged shoot apical meristems; increased number of floral organs including sepal, petal, stamen and carpel; reduced lobing of epidermal leaf cells; short stems; retarded plant growth; late flowering; fewer seeds
Enzymatic activities that typically peak during early maturation of wildtype embryos are also detected in the mutant at 12 DAF. OF these, both NAD-malic E and IDH activities then decreases significantly at 15 DAF and the expected drop in PFK activity is delayed.
Epidermal cells are approximately one-fourth the size of wild-type epidermal cells.  Whole plant is dwarfed with respect to wild-type and single mutant siblings in segregating F2 family.  Spindle-shaped nuclei are almost entirely absent.  Number of chromocenters in double mutant nuclei is half that of wild type nuclei.  Nuclear DNA packaging density is increased with respect to wild type.
Epidermal cells of fifth leaf at maturity are about double in size compared to wild-type cells. Leaves formed at later stages are similar to wild-type.
Epidermal cells on abaxial surface have increased DNA content.
Epidermal pavement cells are strongly reduced in size.
Epidermal strips of pip5k4  plants treated with exogenous PtdIns(4,5)P2 were  incubated in medium containing 10 &mu;M PtdIns(4,5)P2 and  irradiated with white light, after which stomatal apertures  were measured. A reduction in  the light-induced opening of peeled epidermis was observed compared  with that in detached whole leaves. Stomatal apertures  reached maximal opening after 4 h of illumination. The  stomatal apertures of PtdIns(4,5)P2-treated pip5k4 (2.94 &mu;m) were similar to those of WT (3.02 &mu;m), and significantly larger than those of pip5k4  without treatment (2.32 &mu;m).  The stomatal apertures of PtdIns(4)P- and PtdIns(3,4)P2-  treated pip5k4 plants were not significantly different from  those of untreated pip5k4 plants.
Epinastic leaves, reduced expression of DR5pro:GUS auxin reporter, decreased degradation of AXR3-NT:GUS reporter.
ER-derived vesicles obtained from atutr1 plants had a decreased uptake of UDP-glucose compared to the wild type. BiP and Calnexin are overexpressed in the mutant, suggesting that atutr1 plants have the unfolded protein response constitutively activated.
Erysiphe cichoracearum spores had germinated by day 1, but conidiophores did not develop until 4 days post infection. After 6 dpi, many individual colonies had merged; therefore, further analysis was unfeasible. The numbers of conidiophores in colonies on coi1-16 plants increased faster than on wild-type plants.
ethanolamine-phosphate cytidylyltransferase activity is reduced to 74%. Seedling phosphatidylethanolamine content is reduced by 20%. Dwarf when grown at 8<sup>o</sup>C. Earlier senescence of cotyladons and mature leaves. Pale green and smaller seeds. Delay in embryo maturation. Reduced fertility.
Ethanol hypersensitivity.
Ethylene insensitive.  Lacks triple-response phenotype when grown in the presence of ethylene.
Ethylene insensitivity (dominant)
Ethylene-sensitive mutant, floral organs remain attached to the plant body after the shedding of mature seeds, even though a floral abscission zone develops. No other developmental processes were affected. When grown on the medium containing ethylene (10 ppm), mutant seedlings response was limited to lack of abscission in senescenced floral organs. Except with regard to floral abscission, seedling response to ethylene was the same as in wild type.
etiolated seedlings of both wild type and mtk mutants have very low emission of ethylene. The eto3 mutant on the other hand has much higher emission of ethylene. The mtk/eto3 double mutant has a intermediate level of ethylene emission. Since mtk is involved in methionine recycle, the double mutant phenotype indicated that methionine recycle is required to sustain high rates of ethylene synthesis.
Exacerbation of phenotypes observed for single mutant <i>bri1-6</i>: petiole length, inward curling, inlforescence length and rosette size.
Examination under UV light of leaves inoculated with <i>Peronospora parasitica</i> did not reveal occasional plant cell death-associated autofluorescence.
Examination under UV light of leaves inoculated with <i>Peronospora parasitica</i> revealed occasional plant cell death-associated autofluorescence.
Excised hypocotyls develop small and yellowish calli indicating a strong insensitivity to kinetin, while wildtype calli are green-coloured.
Exclusively produces unbranched trichomes.
exhibited a decrease in total extractives, and a concomitant increase in total lignins relative to wild-type plants, more H units and less S units relative to wild-type lignins in the eli1 mutant, arabinose was more abundant in the insoluble residue from eli1 stems
exhibited a decrease in total extractives, and a concomitant increase in total lignins relative to wild-type plants, more H units relative to wild-type lignins in pom1, arabinose was more abundant in the insoluble residue from pom1,
exhibited a decrease in total extractives, and a concomitant increase in total lignins relative to wild-type plants  fucose was more abundant in det3 relative to wild type, increase in rhamnose and xylose in det3 stems
Exhibited the highest level of resistance to fluoroacetate (FAc). Its germination and growth was unaffected by the toxin in the presence of exogenous sucrose. In the presence of FAc with no sucrose, post-germinative growth may have been slightly affected. When germinated and grown on sodium acetate, the mutant exhibited bleaching at concentrations which had little effect on the wild type.
Exhibit pale-green cotyledons and true leaves and grow more slowly under greenhouse conditions. Total chlorophyll content and levels of chlorophyll a and b are significantly reduced.
Exhibits 5-15% of wild-type photosystem I (PSI) activity whereas that of photosystem II (PSII) is only reduced to about 75% of wild-type levels.
Exhibits an insensitivity toward FR abrogation of gravitropism, showing a phenotype intermediate between phyA and phyB.
Exhibits spontaneous cell death in leaves after bolting and increased salicylic acid levels and localized cell death after inoculation with Pst DC3000.
Exposure of seedlings to 50 &#956;M Cd2+ for 2 days does not induce phytochelatin biosynthesis.
Exposure of seedlings to 50 &#956;M Cd2+ for 2 days does phytochelatin biosynthesis as it does in wild type.
Expresses a promoterless beta-glucuronidase gene in the distal region of the root meristem. Weak staining occurs mainly in the QC and surrounding stem cells. The mutation causes extra cells in the columella root cap and the QC.
Express nuclear-encoded Lhcb and RbcS  transcripts in the absence of chloroplast development.
External application of <i>trans</i>-zeatin partially rescues the growth of aerial parts of the mutant, and reduced its lateral root elongation.
External structures of the carpel are largely absent.  Ovules arise from a surface or column of tissue at the center of the flower. The inner integuments of these ovules are normal but the asymmetrical outer integument is now a nearly symmetrical and relatively amorphous collar of tissue.
Extra cotyledons. Only three or four true rosette leaves produced initially, then after a pause of a few days, leaves are produced at random positions. These leaves are often produced from the adaxial side of leaf / cotyledon bases instead of the SAM. >50 rosette leaves produced at maturity. Altered phyllotaxy. SAM has irregular appearance. Some radially symmetric organs.
Extracts from mutant leaves, flowers, and siliques show a 95% reduction in  p-acylglucosyltransferase activity relative to wild type extracts, and p-ABA-glucose formation is severely diminished when assayed in a radiotracer feeding experiment using mutant and wild type leaves. Though the ratio of glucosylated to non-glucosylated pABA is much lower in mutant plants, they have comparable levels of total pABA.
Extra floral organs.  No homeotic transformations.
Extra petal whorls.  Extra sepal whorls.
Extra stamens.  Indeterminate floral meristem. Meristem eventually terminates in unfused chimerical stamen-carpel organs.
Extra stamens.   Indeterminate floral meristem.  Meristem finally terminates in unfused chimerical staminoid carpel organs.
Extra stamens.  Staminoid carpels.  Floral meristem indeterminacy
Extra whorls of petals.  Extra whorls of sepals.  Decreased stamen number.
Extreme acceleration of flowering time.
Extreme dwarf in the dark and in the light.  Reduced root hair number.  Trichome size and branching is reduced.  Ploidy defect.
Extreme dwarfism and male gametophyte defect (~38% pollen abortion).Increased amount of fatty acids (58%) with significant icrease in unsatuated FAs and decrease in saturated FAs.
Extreme dwarf phenotype.
Extreme early-flowering, stunted in growth, phyllotaxy defects in the inflorescence.
Extreme hypocotyl shortening when grown in the dark. Much smaller than either of the single mutants. Plants die at or near the time at which they flower.
Extremely low fertility.
Extremely pale under normal growth conditions.
Extremely  reduced fertility. Reduced pollen tube growth.
Extremely thin pollen exine layer. Nexine, bacula, and tectum are present. Many mature pollen grains are withered and aggregated, but fertility is normal.
Fails to suppress the zwi phenotype.
Failure of stomatal guard mother cells to differentiate into guard cells. The epidermis of homozygous mutant contains small tumors of cells with intermediate stomatal lineage identity. Plants die as pale small seedlings.
Faster germination rate, increase in anthocyanins and narrow, curled leaves.
fc2-1 seedlings do not become green when grown in short days (4 or 8 hours light).They are defective in de-etiolation response in short days. This is likely due to accumulation of protoporphyrin IX which in turn causes production of reactive oxygen species and triggers chloroplast degradation pathway.
female gametophyte lethal
Female gametophyte lethality.
Female gametophytes do not complete all mitotic divisions and embryo sac development is defective.
female gametophytic defects; reduced fertility and pollen tube overgrowth in the synergids;
Female sterile. Homeotic conversion of ovules to carpel like structures.
fertilization-independent endosperm development and; embryo abortion and endosperm overproduction after fertilization.
Fewer branch points in the heterozygous mutant than in the homozygous one.
Fewer  but enlarged plastids. Contain short FtsZ filaments within a single oversized plastid.
Fewer ER bodies than WT. ER body area is larger than WT.
Fewer number of chloroplasts in the leaf mesophyll cells. Chloroplasts were constricted and larger than those observed in the WT.
Fewer rosette leaves than wild type indicating a prolonged plastochron.
fim5 mutant exhibits delayed pollen germination and retarded pollen tube growth. FIM5 loss-of-function leads to redistribution of actin cytoskeleton in pollen grains and disorganization of actin filaments in pollen tubes.
Final height of mutant plant about two-thirds of that of wild-type.
Final stem height slightly taller than wild type.
fkgp-1 mutants have about 40 times more L-fucose than wild type Arabidopsis plants, but the levels of other monosaccharides do not appear to differ significantly in the mutants. No obvious phenotypic abnormalities were observed in the fkgp-1 mutants, nor were any differences in the sugar composition of cell wall polysaccharides detected.
fkgp-2 mutants have about 40 times more L-fucose than wild type Arabidopsis plants. No obvious phenotypic abnormalities were observed in the fkgp-2 mutants, nor were any differences in the sugar composition of cell wall polysaccharides detected.
FLC levels decreased during cold treatment but then increased significantly after the plants were returned to 23?C.
FLC levels return to a moderately high level after 4 wk vernalization.
Floral organ defects.
floral organ shedding, abnormal (differences in abscission zone morphology were first detected when organ separation normally occurs in wild-type flowers (stage 16). At this point, abscission zone cells expand and become vacuolated in wild type (Fig. 1F), whereas in mutant flowers the organs stay attached and cells within the sepal and petal abscission zones remain small and densely cytoplasmic);    Golgi apparatus, abnormal (in mutant plants, cells in the region of sepal abscission zone predominately exhibited circularized or cup-shaped multilamellar structures rather than the flat stacks of Golgi cisternae typical of wild type);    tubular-vesicular networks, abnormal;    paramural bodies, present in greater numbers in organisms (flowers, fruit walls and pedicels of mutant flowers).
Flowered early under both long days and short days.
Flowered extremely late after 8 wk vernalization and required at least 14 wk of cold to fully saturate the vernalization requirement.
Flowered more rapidly under long days than under short days. Vernalization reduced flowering time in the mutant, but the reduction was higher than in WT Columbia.
Flowering of the mutant is not significantly delayed.
Flowering time is delayed when grown on vermiculite but not on nutrient agar.
Flowering time of mutants at 23?C short days and 27?C in short days is not affected compared to wild type.
Flowering time similar to that of the flc-3 single mutant in both LD and SD conditions.
Flower meristems behave like inflorescence meristems and continuously elaborate new meristems, resulting in the 'cauliflower' phenotype. Eventually flowers resembling those of ap1 single mutants eventually appear and set seeds.
Flowers, leaves and trichomes are normal.
Flowers 3 days later than wild type. Hypersensitive to drought stress. Decreased sensitivity to ABA treatment during germination.
Flowers and siliques bend downwards and pedicels are reduced in length.  The inflorescence is more compact with respect to wild type due to a reduction in internode length.  Overall plant height is approximately half that of a wild type Ws-3 plant. Change in lignin deposition in the mutant.  Deposition begins much earlier in the mutant and an irregular pattern of lignin accumulation results in gaps in the lignin ring.
Flowers are also significantly smaller than wild-type ones and have anthers that are almost completely non-dehiscent and fail to extend above the level of the stigma in fully open flowers.
Flowers are indistinguishable from those of wild type.
Flowers are male sterile as they never open to release pollen, even though the capsule size is normal.
Flowers are seriously distorted in petal morphology and display petal-to-sepal and sepal-to-sepal fusions during early flower development.  The fusions disappear during later flower development.
Flowers are smaller and develop one week later than wild type or single mutants.
Flowers consistently ealier than wild-type plants under long day conditions.
Flowers have more petals than the wild-type, particularly in the first 10 flowers.  Four petal primordia are initiated in the same positions as in wild-type.  The extra petals, if initiated, always arise adjacent to these normally positioned petals.  Occasionally, petals form incisions at their distal tip and adopt a heart shape.  There is also a subtle carpel fusion defect at the distal end of the gynoecium in a small portion of mutant flowers.  The organ-number defect is petal specific.  In mutant plants, the transcript levels of the transcription factors CUC1 and CUC2 are significantly increased compared to wild-type.  Overall expression domains of CUC1 and CUC2 appear to be normal.  However, during floral stages 5-7, extra CUC1- and CUC2-expressing cells are observed in the second whorl.
Flowers of the mutant have shorter petals and anthers. The pistil is much longer than the anthers, leading to a reduction in self-fertilization. The stigma emerges early from flower bud.
Fluence response curves in both R and FR light confirmed that rsf1 seedlings responded normally to R light and are less sensitive to all the tested fluences of FR light. However, unlike phyA null mutants (phyA-211), they clearly responded to increasing fluences of FR light.
Following <i>P. syringae</i> infection,  camalexin in the double mutant was undetectable. Similar results were observed following <i>A. brassicicola</i> infection.
Following <i>P. syringae</i> infection,  camalexin levels in cyp79B2 were approximately half of wild-type levels. Similar results were observed following <i>A. brassicicola</i> infection.
Following <i>P. syringae</i> infection, camalexin levels in cyp79B3 were indistinguishable from that of the wild type.
Following <i>Pythium irregulare</i> infection, jasmonic acid levels were dramatically increased in ein2-5 mutants than in wild-type plants.
Following <i>Pythium irregulare</i> infection, salicylic acid levels increased over wild-type levels.
Following <i>Pythium irregulare</i> infection, the increase in JA levels was comparable in wild-type and sid2-1 plants.
Following <i>Pythium irregulare</i> infection, the increase in JA levels was lower in sid2-1 plants than in wild type.
Fork-like appearance of cotyledon secondary veins similar to that of vcs-7.
formed small siliques with only few viable seeds. Scanning electron microscopy of pollen grains from plants homozygous for the T-DNA insertion revealed no morphological differences compared to wild-type pollen. However, light microscopy showed that tapetal cells were relatively thin compared to those from the wild type at the same stage of development and the number of viable pollen grains tested by fluorescein diacetate stain was smaller the T-DNA insertion line.
Forms chlorotic lesions on leaf lamina. Enhanced resistance to bacterial and fungal pathogens.
forms chlorotic lesions shortly after  germination which spread as the plant grow and is most prominent between leaf veins. The intensity of the chlorosis and the affected leaf surface increases during maturation until HR-like necrotic spots appear inside the  chlorotic area. shmt1-1 plants also display a reduction in size and rate of development  compared with wild-type controls.
Forms supernumerary egg cells.  Homozygous line is lethal.
Four distinct sepal primordia are initiated in a normal pattern during stage 3 of flower development as was seen previously for cuc2-1 and rbe-3 single mutants. Later growth of sepal primordia in the cuc2-1 rbe-3 double is uneven, similar to that seen in rbe-3 single mutants. An increased extent of sepal fusion in the cuc2-1 rbe-3 double mutant as compared with cuc2-1 was first observed during stage 6.
Four-fold reduction in esterase activity toward 2,4-D-methyl and pNA in mutant compared to wild type.
Four-weeks old plants have necrotic lesions and callose deposition.
Free amino acid levels in fresh tissues of the mutant plants at 30 DAI were similar to those in wild type, however the level of proline in the mutant plants was 4-fold higher than that in wild type.
Frequently (70% of double mutant flowers) sepals were fused and they showed carpelloid features, including stigmatic papillae and multiple ovules developed along the margin of each organ.
Frequently observed defects (~30%) in the mature seed in all the silique of heterozygous plants.
Frequent multicellular trichomes and clusters of adjacent trichomes.
Freshly harvested nic2-1 seeds had a decreased  level of poly(ADP)ribosylation compared to Ws seeds.
Fresh weight of mutant plants was 2.1 times higher than that of the wild-type plants when grown under supplemental UV-B light. Mutant plants were less sensitive to UV-B light. In addition, the mutant plants have overbranching trichomes on their leaves and stems. Trichomes with more than five branches were often seen on mutant leaves, but were never found on the wild-type leaves.
Fruits of this double mutant exhibited a more severe replumless phenotype than rpl-2, similar to that shown by the strong rpl-3 mutant.
Fruits produced by bp-1, knat2 and bp-1 knat2  plants showed a wild-type aspect, both in replum and valves.
Fully rescues downward orientation of siliques characteristic of bp single mutants. Shorter than WT. Rescuse partial loss of apical dominance characteristic of single bp mutants. Partial rescue of primary inflorescence internode length characteristic of bp single mutants.
Further reduction of rosette diameter size compared to single mutant ahk3-7.
Fusions between rosette leaves and in inflorescences.
G6PDH, 6PGDH, AGPase and GK activities, which typically peak at 9-12 DAF in wildtype, all show a reduction at the equivalent temporal stage in the mutant.
GA abolished the effect of the mutation on flowering time in SDs.
GA applications restored trichome initiation, although GA  concentrations exceeding 10 &#956;M caused a decrease, rather than a further increase, in trichome production - an effect also seen with wild-type plants. At GA concentrations exceeding 100 &#956;M, a reduction in trichome production on cauline leaves and branches was observed.
Gain of function phenotype caused by overexpression of AT2G40400. When grown in the presence of brassinazole, an inhibitor of brassolinide biosynthesis, plants are dwarf, pale green leaves and have reduced levels of chlorophyll a/b.
Gametophytic effect. Cannot be transmitted by male gametophyte. Therefore, homozygote plants cannot be recovered.  Pollen tubes either burst immediately upon germination, or are short and plump. Pollen tubes are unable to penetrate the cell wall of stigmatic cells.  Pollen tube actin cytoskeleton is severely disorganized.
Gametophytic lethal. 50% pollen grains from the heterozygous plants are significantly deformed, without pollen tube formation.
GA-signaling promoting root and leaf expansion is not completely abolished.
GA treatment did not restore a normal growth phenotype or floral transition to double mutant plants grown in SDs.
gcn2 plants show less glyphosate-derived effects, but are phenotypically indistinguishable from wild-type plants.
GDP-D-Man pyrophosphohydrolase activity is 50% lower than wild type.
GDP-D-Man pyrophosphohydrolase activity is 71% lower than wild type.
Germinates even without the activation of phytochromes.  Exhibits disrupted shoot negative gravitropism.
Germinating <i>cad1-1</i> mutant shows a dwarf phenotype with normal cotyledons but dark-brown- or black-colored cell death lesions on the true leaves. Leaf senescence with chlorophyll breakdown is accelerated in this mutant. This phenotype segregates as a recessive trait. Homozygous <i>cad1</i> mutant cannot produce seeds indicating that normal plant development are also disturbed by the mutation.
Germination of mutant seeds after dark imbibition and far red/red light treatment was slower than that of wild type seeds.
Germination of mutant seeds was not affected and visual inspection did not reveal any drastic change in phenotype compared with WT plants, except for a slightly lighter pigmentation.
Germination of the mutant seeds after irradiation with far red light is inhibited by paclobutrazol, an inhibitor of GA biosynthesis.
Germination potential in mutant seeds was highly reduced in comparison with wild-type seeds. Germination rates reached a maximum of 3.2% after 15 days and thereafter did not increase during a 24-day period of imbibition, whereas 100% of after ripened wild-type seeds completed germination within 7 days of the initiation of imbibition.
Germination rate hypersensitive to ABA, osmotic stress and glucose. Under these conditions, the plants are slower growing.
gh3.9-1 mutants had greater primary root length, increased sensitivity to indole-3-acetic acid (IAA)-mediated root growth inhibition, but no obvious effects on apical dominance or leaf morphology.
Glassy trichomes.
Glassy trichomes with an increased number in branch points. Trichomes are normal in size but produce up to seven branch points.
GlcA transferase activity in pgsip1 was only 50% of the wild type level.  Significantly lower contents of GlcA compared to wild type.
glossy stem
Glucose 3-phosphate level is about one-fourth of that of wild type.
Glucose 3-phosphate level is below detection limits.
Glucose 6-phosphate level is about one-fourth of that of wild type.
Glucose 6-phosphate level is below detection limits.
Glucose 6-phosphate levels are very close to the detection limits. It can therefore not be excluded that a low residual Glc6P content is present.
glx2-1 plants were indistinguishable from wild type plants under normal growth conditions. glx2-1 plants are more sensitive to salt stress than wild type plants.
Gravitropic curvature similar to that of wildtype (Col) when dark-grown. Over time however, the curvature becomes intermediate between that of the nph4 single mutant and wildtype.
Gravitropic response of dark-grown mutant hypocotyls is slower than that of wildtype (Col).
green fluorescent seeds
grew similary to WT plants throughout the life of the plant
Grow more slowly than wild type, flower 10-14 days later, have reduced organ sizes, exhibit slight epinasty of their leaves and flowers, and display reduced apical dominance.
grow much slower than the wild type, and growth ceases at the vegetative growth stage before bolting. grana deficient. decreased chlorophyll content. accumulated very low amounts of LHCII trimer.
Grow normally in air and do not show any visual phenotypic difference in comparison with wild-type plants.
Grow normally when seeds were germinated under conventional conditions (21?C), mutant seedlings grow more slowly than those of the wild type at a lower temperature (16?C).  In both conditions, the chloroplast size and number per cell in the drp5A mutants.  Mutant root tips display perturbation of the cell array and formation of incomplete or twisted cell plates, similar to other A. thaliana mutants of cytokinetic proteins.
Grown under normal conditions mutant plants show weaker or no wilting phenotype.  Mutant leaves become wilty after plants are transferred from normal conditions to higher transpiration conditions for 6 hrs, whereas wt plants did not show the leaf-wilting phenotype under the same conditions.  Mutants are more resistant to drought and to osmotic stresss in both germination and growth.  Transcription of stress-inducible marker genes (RD29A, P5CS and ABA2) during non-stress  conditions is induced in mutant plants.
Grows at the same rate as wildtype.
Grows more slowly than wild type, has high starch content at the end of the night and has very high levels of maltose.
Grows more slowly than wild type; produces abnormally short and bushy bolts at the time of flowering.
Growth and morphology not significantly different from wild-type.
growth arrest (embryos are slow to emerge from the seed coat; after emergence, the embryos remain white with unexpanded cotyledons even after twelve days on GM media)
Growth delay.  Impaired development of rosette leaves and delay in flowering.
Growth is more severely affected by 3.5 mM acetate than wt plants.  Under these conditions, mutant plant growth decreased 50-60% compared to no treatment while wt plant growth decreased 30-40%.  Disrupted in thier ability to sense acetate.
Growth of bps1-2 mutants on CPTA-supplemented medium resulted in partial rescue of both leaf and root defects. bps1-2 mutants grown on control growth medium have small radialized leaves with very little vascular tissue, and very short misshapen knotted-looking roots. By contrast, bps1-2 mutants grown on CPTA-supplemented medium produced larger flattened leaves that contained primary and secondary veins, and smooth elongated roots.
growth of the cbl1  cbl9 double mutant was significantly more inhibited than the  growth of wild-type roots under low-K+ conditions. Double mutants lost  water significantly more slowly than the ecotype hybrid  plants. Hypersensitive to ABA treatmnet.
Growth of vcs-7 at 16?C resulted in only modest suppression of growth.
Growth on sucrose: Yellow leaves. Small plants. Sterile flowers. Lacks palisadic cell layer. Small plastids. Missing stacked grana structures.. Structurally aberant nucleoids.
Growth retardation, increased trichome branch number, increased susceptibility to fungus.
growth retardation and strongly enhanced basal resistance to virulent H. parasitica; spontaneous death of individual cells in leaves of 2-, 3-, and 4-week-old plants; SA levels fourfold higher than wild plants
Growth severely affected during reproductive growth phase: onset of flowering varies with each individual plant.
grp7-KD (knock-down) mutants are less-sensitive to osmotic stress based on germination assays, and more sensitive to cold stress based on freezing tolerance analyses, than their wild type counterparts.
grp7-KO (knock-out) mutants are less-sensitive to osmotic stress based on germination assays, and more sensitive to cold stress based on freezing tolerance analyses, than their wild type counterparts. These mutants also have altered stomatal responses. ABA-induced stomatal closure is decreased, cold-induced stomatal opening is increased, and NaCl and mannitol-induced stomatal closing is increased  in grp7-KO plants relative to wild type. There is no difference in stomatal closing in response to light.
GSL content also decreased in mutant seeds.
gtg1-1 mutant plants do not show any obvious phenotypic abnormalities and are indistinguishable from wild-type plants.
gtg2-1 mutant plants do not show any obvious phenotypic abnormalities and are indistinguishable from wild-type plants.
Guard cells do not generate NO in response to  H2O2 and are not significantly different to untreated controls.
Gynoecia in double mutant plants display abnormal style morphology and altered vascular patterning, similar to phenotype of sty1-1 single mutant - his phenotype was enhanced in double mutant. Apical-basal patterning of sty1-1 sty2-1 gynoecia was hypersensitive to reductions in polar auxin transport (PAT).
Gynoecium  often supported by an elongated gynophore.
H3K4me3 and K3K36me2 modifications are redistributed within genes but the overall abundance of these modifications within chromatin is not changed.
Has 35% of the beta-glucosidase activity of the wild type (Col-0).
has a large increase of seed threonine content and a small decrease of most other seed amino acids. glycine content is significantly lower in seedlings.
Has a sucrose-dependent seedling growth phenotype. Growth arrested 3-4 days after germination in the light, on medium without sucrose.  In the dark, hypocotyl growth is significantly less than the wild type. Has less than 2% of L-3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase activity, and reduced 2-trans-enoyl-CoA hydratase activity towards long chain enoyl-CoAs. Accumulated 2.5-fold more long chain acyl-CoAs in 5-day-old seedlings. Has fewer but larger peroxisomes.
Has fewer trichomes than in the try single mutant, but more than in the frc single mutant.
has increased number of lateral roots, hypocotyls have impaired gravitropic curvature
Has pale green cotyledons when grown in the presence of Brassinazole (Brz)an inhibitor of the biosynthesis of brassinosteroids.
Has shortened inflorescences and reduced rosette size and produces rounded leaves and shortened petioles. The width of the leaf blades of the ben1-1D mutant is greater than that of wild-type
Has significantly higher ratio of nitrile, and lower ratio of isothiocyanate. Has less damage by T. ni, compared to the wild type Col-0.
have 10-25% of wild type ascorbic acid, exhibit  microlesions, express pathogenesis-related (PR) proteins, and have enhanced basal  resistance against infections caused by Pseudomonas syringae. The mutants have a  delayed senescence phenotype with smaller leaf cells than the wild type at leaf  maturity. The vtc leaves have more glutathione than the wild type, with higher ratios  of reduced glutathione to glutathione disulfide.
he mutant line cbk3 has a single T-DNA insertion into the 7th intron. RT-PCR analysis revealed that expression of the AtCBK3 gene was almost completely suppressed in the mutant compared with the wild-type. No significant phenotypic changes were observed in line cbk3 compared with WT plants. However when seedlings of 10-day-old cbk3 mutant, WT  were subjected to 45 C for 30 min, then returned to 22 C, the cbk3 mutant plants were impaired in basal thermotolerance and exhibited a significant delay in growth after heat treatment.
Heterozygotes and homozygotes have a WT phenotype
Heterozygotes have reduced transmission due to defects in pollen tube germination and elongation.
Heterozygotes show no obvious growth phenotype.  Homozygotes are embryo lethal with a very early arrest of embryo development, in the pre-globular stage of development.
Heterozygous  embryos abort if the mutant allele is  derived from the female, but develop  normally if it is derived from the male. Embryos derived  from mutant eggs abort irrespective of the  paternal contribution. Thus, the mea  mutant displays maternal-effect embryo lethality.
Heterozygous parents and progeny are indistinguishable from wild type.
Heterozygous plants appear normal, except for the production of some severely wrinkled seeds. The altered seed phenotype is visible, during silique maturation, as white seeds amongst green ones. The dessicated wrinkled seeds are unable to germinate after imbibition (embryo lethal).
Heterozygous plants consistently display an albino seed phenotype (25%) which represent the homozygous population. Homozygous pdx2.1 seeds are developmentally delayed compared to wild-type and heterozygous siblings. The developmental arrest occurs at the globular stage of embryo developments. Progress to heart stage is never observed. The arrest in development is explained by the assumption that during the early stages of embryogenesis the surrounding maternal tissues supply vitamin B6 among other nutrients but that the globular to heart transition may be critical in the conversion from heterotrophy to autotrophy.
Heterozygous plants consistently display an albino seed phenotype (25%) which represent the homozygous population. Homozygous pdx2.2 seeds are developmentally delayed compared to wild-type and heterozygous siblings. The developmental arrest occurs at the globular stage of embryo developments. Progress to heart stage is never observed. The arrest in development is explained by the assumption that during the early stages of embryogenesis the surrounding maternal tissues supply vitamin B6 among other nutrients but that the globular to heart transition may be critical in the conversion from heterotrophy to autotrophy.
Heterozygous plants exhibit variable growth phenotypes, including increased internodal length and decreased production of siliques.  Many exhibit retarded growth and overall dwarf stature compared to wild-type plants.
high chlorophyll fluorescence,  unable to grow photoautotrophically in soil, showed a retarded growth pattern and exhibited pale green leaves
High chlorophyll fluorescence.  Not able to grow photoautotrophically on soil but could be maintained on sucrose-supplemented medium (did not develop any fertile flowers).  Impaired photosystem II.
High chlorophyll fluorescence (hcf) phenotype associated with photosynthetic lesion.
high chlorophyll fluorescence mutant.  impaired electron transfer between PSII and PSI.  reduced cytochrome b6f complex level.
Higher degree of branching in plants and have a longer lifespan. Almost completely sterile.
higher level of undegraded leaf starch content than that of bam1 bam3 or bam3 bam4.
Higher levels of anthocyanins than WT under both drought and well- watered control conditions.
Higher levels of bioactive GA4 and GA1 in the siliques of mutant compared to wild type.
Higher levels of DNA methylation than in wild type.
Higher levels of superoxide (reactive oxygen species) production were observed, particularly in trichomes. This corrolates with the induction, in the mutant, of three genes known to be involved in stress responses.
Higher PIMT protein levels in dry seeds as compared to WT. Seeds are more resistant to aging than WT.  Mutant plants are morphologically similar to WT.
Higher survival rate than wild type after 14 days of water withholding. This phenotype is supported by the observation of a moderate suppression of transpiration in the mutant.
High frequency of production of cup-shaped cotyledons in seedlings, more than half fail to produce primary shoots.
High frequency production of cup-shaped cotyledons in seedlings, most form a primary shoot.
high-glucosinolate chemotype caused by overexpression of IQD1 (At3g09710)
high level of resistance to the herbicide N-(3-[1-ethyl-1-methylpropyl]-5-isoxazolyl)-2,6,dimethoxybenzamide (isoxaben); resistance is ca. 300 and 3 times that of the wild type for homozygotes and the heterozygotes, respectively; resistance also expressed in tissue culture.
high level of resistance to the herbicide N-(3-[1-ethyl-1-methylpropyl]-5-isoxazolyl)-2,6,dimethoxybenzamide (isoxaben); resistance is ca. 90 and 6 times that of the wild type for the homozygotes and the heterozygotes, respectively; resistance also expressed in tissue culture.
High levels of double-strand breaks.
Highly susceptible to fungal pathogen Alternaria brassisicola.
Highly susceptible to moderately elevated temperatures and defective in acquired thermotolerance.
Highly susceptible to the oomycete <i>Pythium irregulare</i>.
hml1-1 seeds have much higher levels of free branched-chain amino acids Ile, Leu and Val. hml1-1 seeds also have higher Arg, Asp, Gly, His, Ser, Trp and Tyr.
hml1-2 seeds have much higher levels of free branched-chain amino acids Ile, Leu and Val. hml1-2 seeds also have higher Arg, Asp, Gly, His, Ser, Trp and Tyr.
homologous recombination (HR) frequency reduced to 15% of that in the wild-type; produces significantly more lateral branching from the rosette.
Homozygote has a WT phenotype, even under conditions of Mg+ stress.
Homozygote has no obvious visible phenotype.
homozygote lethal.
Homozygote phenotype:  Salt sensitive, less than 10% seedling survival on 150 mM NaCl. Normal response to other osmotic stressors including 0.4 M sorbitol with 0.028 M glucose
/nor 0.4 M sucrose or mannitol.
homozygote plant has no visible phenotype. No significant seed threonine increase either.
Homozygotes: Tip growth in almost all root hair cells was blocked due to rupture of the tip.
Homozygotes: WT phenotype under normal growth conditions. Under conditions of magnesium stress (under 50 mM Mg2+), germination is poor and plantlet development is severely retarded.
Homozygotes are embryo lethal
Homozygotes are embryo lethal, due to the abortion of toz/toz seeds.  Transmission of the mutation is not affected through the pollen, only through the ovules.  Homozygote embryos also show abnormal expression of patterning genes such as STM, MP, FIL and ANT.
Homozygotes are embryo lethal.
Homozygotes are embryo lethal- segregates at 25%.
Homozygotes are embryonic lethal.  Auxin resistant.  Rosette leaves are more rounded with shortened petioles.  Retains sensitivity to ethylene.
Homozygotes are not recovered. Female gametophyte development is delayed and asynchronous. During fertilization, fusion of polar nuclei does not occur. Polar nuclei nucloeli are smaller than WT.
Homozygotes are sensitive to UV-B treatment. UV-B treatment causes an inhibition of root growth.
Homozygotes are sterile. Pollen is not viable and female gametophyte development is blocked after meiosis.
Homozygotes are susceptible to infection by Acem2, Ac2 and Ac7 innoculations of A. candida white rust pathogens. Blisters and chlorotic patches form on leaves of susceptible plants.
Homozygotes exhibit a low nonphotochemical quenching phenotype. Also, chlorophyll a+b content is higher than WT, whereas the chlorophyll a/b ratio was smaller than WT.   Morphologically WT under normal growth conditions. Fv/Fm is almost identical to WT, as is the xanthophyll cycle pigment pool size.
Homozygotes have a reduced number of columella root cap (COL) and lateral root cap (LRC) cell layers. Meristem length, meristem cell number and root length are comparable to WT. Periclinal division rates in the COL and LRC stem cells are reduced.
Homozygotes have a WT phenotype
Homozygotes have a WT phenotype, despite the fact that AT5G62950 is greatly reduced.
Homozygotes have a WT phenotype. Expression of AT5G62940 is not altered.
Homozygotes have a WT phenotype. Root bending and root elongation assays under osmotic and ABA treatments showed no significant difference compared to WT. However, primary root elongation was inhibited by salt stress. Relative electrolyte leakage was significantly higher in salt - stressed plants as compared to WT.
Homozygotes have a WT phenotype with regards to susceptibility to transformation by Agrobacterium.
Homozygotes have reduced seed set -around 59% of seeds are aborted.
Homozygotes have shorter roots than WT. Respiration rates are significantly lower than in WT roots.
Homozygotes have small stature, serrated leaves, an increased number of trichomes on their sepals, short filaments and pistils. Approximately 5% of the flowers of mutant plants had five petals. Their fertility was reduced to less than 20% compared to heterozygous plants due to embryonic abortion.
Homozygotes have WT phenotype
Homozygotes not recoverable as mature plants. Most seeds abort however a small number (6%) were recovered after germination on MS plates. The seedlings had short roots, no true leaves and died soon after germination.
homozygotes show elongated mitochondria
homozygous are embryo lethal, arrested at the globular stage and do not undergo transition to heart stage
Homozygous are lethal. In self-fertilized heterozygous, severe seed defects were observed  in the mature siliques, whereas no obvious defect was observed before the reproductive stage. The mature siliques contain normal and  aborted seeds at a 1:1 ratio.  Male gametophytic lethal. Microspores normally undergo an  asymmetric cell division, pollen mitosis I (PMI), to produce bicellular pollen grains. The larger vegetative cell  does not divide, but the smaller generative cell undergoes mitosis, PMII, to form the two sperm cells, thereby  generating tricellular pollen grains. Embryo is arrested at the  globular stage, most likely because of loss of endosperm development, whereas it is arrested at the one- or  two-cell stage in presumptive homozygous plants
Homozygous AticmtA mutants do not have any visible phenotypic defects and do not exhibit ABA hypersensitivity.
Homozygous axr1-12 plants that are heterozygous for axl-1 display severe growth defects. These seedlings developed short, slow growing roots compared with wild-type roots, and were arrested at the late seedling stage.
Homozygous clps3-1 mutants cannot be generated. Reciprocal crosses using the gametes from a clps3-1 heterozygote indicate that wild-type and clps3-1 pollen are equally efficient in fertilizing wild type plants. But, there is roughly a 50% reduction in transmission of the clps3-1 mutant female gametophyte. No embryo development can be observed in a presumed homozygote indicating lethality at a very early stage after fertilization. Expression of 35S:CLPS3:TAP rescues the embryo lethality phenotype.
Homozygous cls8-1 plants had crinkled leaves that showed slight yellowing at 4C  (also apparent under normal growth conditions)  Germination and cotyledon development are indistinguishable from wild type (Columbia), however the first developing true leaves appear bleached. Subsequent leaves emerge curled and ?ruffled?, with bleached edges. The rosette leaves expand some become crinkled and show patches of white or pits on the surface. There is often a degree of asymmetry along the axis of the main vein, with one half of the leaf failing to fully expand. The bleaching is localized to the petiole and the base of the leaf, and extends along the edges of the leaf. As they continue to expand, the leaves become greener, although the crinkling remains. Following bolting, the  cauline leaves show similar characteristics to rosette leaves.  Flowers produced by cls8-1 plants can be asymmetrical and the petals crinkled in appearance. Siliques grow  to a normal size, but are slightly pale in colour with patches of white, and exhibit ?pits? like those present on the leaves.  Root growth is reduced in cls8-1 compared with wild type by approximately 20%.
homozygous double mutants are pollen lethal
Homozygous embryos have proportionally thicker hypocotyls and smaller cotyledons. However, the general organization of the tissues in the embryonic axis, such as procambial strands, ground tissue, and protodermis, was indistinguishable from that of wild-type embryos described in the literature.
Homozygous embryos produce very low levels of chlorophyll.
Homozygous embryos were reduced in size compared with wild-type embryos, and their cotyledons were smaller, with irregular borders, pointed tips, and uneven sizes.
Homozygous lines have defective stomatal responses to CO2. Showed more rapid leaf expansion as compared with the WT plants under the 700p.p.m. CO2 conditions.When exposed to elevated CO2 levels, stomatal aperture is reduced in the WT plants, but not in mutants.
Homozygous loss of function mutation shows decreased sensitivity to ABA.
Homozygous mutant develop a small rosette with dark green and serrated leaves, initiates flowering 10 to 15 days after the wild type, and is almost totally sterile, although occasionally it produces short siliques containing two to five seed.
Homozygous mutant embryos develop more slowly compared with wild-type embryos during the later stages of development. Abnormal morphology starts to be evident only after the heart stage.
Homozygous mutant plants [CYCA2;3(-/-)] did not show any phenotype with morphology or growth rates obviously different from those of the wild type. However, the nuclei in trichomes of the mutant plants were larger than those of wild-type trichomes.  The proportion of trichomes with four ranches was significantly higher and that of three-branch trichomes was significantly lower in the mutant than in the wild type. The mutation  significantly increased the proportion of cells with a ploidy levels of 16C or higher
Homozygous mutant plants have decreased sensitivity to ABA.
Homozygous mutant progeny cannot be generated from a self-crossed heterozygous parent.  There is a defect in male gametogenesis.
Homozygous mutants are defective in embryogenesis and the plants die shortly after germination.
Homozygous mutant seeds can germinate in vitro on agar plates containing Murashige and Skoog (MS) salt plus 1% sucrose, although the  growth/developmental rate of the homozygous seedlings was slower compared with that of wild-type seedlings. Whereas wild-type seedlings displayed fully expanded green cotyledons, true leaves and a well-developed root system by 14 d after germination, homozygous seedlings were much smaller and white or pale green in color. Underdeveloped cotyledons emerged from the homozygous seeds but expanded very slowly and sometimes showed bumpy irregular surfaces and occasional anthocyanin expression. Partial greening was observed in ise2 seedlings only after culture for several weeks. Most of the homozygous seedlings developed leaf-like structures that were translucent and contained trichomes. The aerial portions of the homozygous seedlings generally were stunted and thicker and frequently exhibited callus-like structures after extended periods of culture. Mutant seedlings often form stunted inflorescence shoot- and flower-like organs but normal-looking roots and root hairs. Frequently, multiple short shoots originate from the apical dome of a single original seedling, forming a broccoli-like structure. Homozygous seedlings grown in culture with 1% sucrose are sterile and perish immediately after germinating in soil or on MS medium without sucrose.
Homozygous mutant seeds do not progress beyond the globular stage of embryo development; embryo lethal.
Homozygous mutants initiated flowering 7 to 12  days after the wild type and were fertile: they produced 45 to 60% of the amount of seed of the wild type.
Homozygous offsprings of the T-DNA line show a characteristic set of phenotypes. The chlorophyll content is reduced to 75% compared to wild type. Plants appear slightly bleached. The ultrastructure of the plastids is conspicuously different to wild type plastids. Most evident is the structure of the thylakoids, which are reduced and the grana are unorganized compared to the wild type situation. The overall architecture of mutant homozygous plants is slightly altered compared to wild type. Roots of 6 day-old seedlings were 35% shorter on average. The main macroscopic effect of the mutation is that mutant plants produce a large amount of aborted seeds. Only about 60% of the mature seeds contain phenotypically normal, viable embryos. Up to 30% of the seeds are aborted, dark and shrunken, and do not germinate. Most of these aborted seeds contain embryos arrested at the globular stage as well as ball/oblong-shaped embryos (ca. 75%). The morphogenesis of these embryos was blocked before initiation of cotyledon growth and establishment of bilateral symmetry. The other aborted seeds contain embryos arrested at the torpedo or bent cotyledon stage with abnormal- shaped, thickened hypocotyls and underdeveloped cotyledons (ca. 25%). About 10% of all seeds are narrow, containing undersized, tenuous embryos which are not viable.
Homozygous otp51-1 mutants can only survive in sucrose-supplemented in vitro cultures under low light conditions. The small developmentally delayed mutants are pale yellow under normal light conditions. otp51-1 mutants fail to splice intron 2 of the the ycf3 transcript encoded in the chloroplast genome. Because YCF3 is required for the proper assembly of photosystem I (PSI), These mutants have multiple defects related to photosynthesis. They have lower levels of total protein, thylakoid membrane protein, and chlorophyll than wild-type plants when both are grown hydroponically. Chlorophyll a/b ratios are elevated in otp51-1 mutants, several PSI and PSII proteins cannot be detected, chlorophyll fluorescence patterns are altered, and the quantum efficiency of PSII is reduced. otp51-1 mutants also have elevated levels of unspliced products from the trnK, trnL, trnV, trnG, clpP, trnI, trnA, and atpF genes.
Homozygous otp51-2 mutants can only survive in sucrose-supplemented in vitro cultures under low light conditions. The small developmentally delayed mutants are pale yellow under normal light conditions. otp51-2 mutants fail to splice intron 2 of the the ycf3 transcript encoded in the chloroplast genome. Because YCF3 is required for the proper assembly of photosystem I (PSI), These mutants have multiple defects related to photosynthesis. They have lower levels of total protein, thylakoid membrane protein, and chlorophyll than wild-type plants when both are grown hydroponically. Chlorophyll a/b ratios are elevated in otp51-2 mutants, several PSI and PSII proteins cannot be detected, chlorophyll fluorescence patterns are altered, and the quantum efficiency of PSII is reduced. otp51-2 mutants also have elevated levels of unspliced products from the trnK, trnL, trnV, trnG, clpP, trnI, trnA, and atpF genes.
homozygous p5cs2-1 mutants arrest during embryo development. Embryos rescued from dissected seeds can give rise to viable seedlings when cultured with 10 mM proline, but some still show developmental defects, such as abnormal cotyledon shape.
Homozygous plants are completely deficient for post-transcriptional gene silencing.
Homozygous plants have siliques segregating ca. 40% embryo lethal with embryos arresting at a variety of stages.
homozygous plants were sterile during early flowering, but flowers produced later were fertile.
Homozygous progeny developed more spindly shoots with shorter siliques than the wild type.
Homozygous progeny does not produce seeds and has to be propagated as segregants from heterozygous plants.
Homozygous progeny has unexpanded pointed cotyledons and very narrow rosette leaves.
Homozygous sag12-2 mutants showed no visibly altered phenotype during senescence compared with wild type plants. SAVs were detected in the mutant line.
Homozygous xnd1-1 plants are dwarf and reached only two-thirds the height of wild-type plants. Compared with wild-type homozygous xnd1-1 also exhibited a reduction in tracheary element length and an increase in metaxylem relative to protoxylem in roots.
hookless in absence of ethylene, reduced ethylene production; small, narrow rosette leaves; bolts and senesces early.
hrd-D mutants produce elevated levels of the HRD transcript. Moreover, the expression domain of HRD expands from inflorescence tissue into vegetative tissue in the hrd-D mutants. The mutants have smaller, thicker green leaves with extra palisade and spongy mesophyll cell layers. Their root network is more dense and the roots have more cortical cell layers. The mutants tolerate drought and salt stress better than wild type plants. A number of genes related to drought are differentially expressed in wild type and hrd-D mutants
HY6 gene; elongated hypocotyl, like hy1 but more yellow and etiolated in appearance; increased apical dominance and reduced leaf size; exhibits many pleiotropic effects.
Hyperaccumulation of  AtSPO11-1 in meiocytes.
Hypermethylated DMRs (differentially methylated regions) are concentrated near centromeric and pericentromeric regions. Mutants developed long roots on sucrose-containing media due to reduced SUC2 expression.
hypersensitive to ABA and salt stress; histone acetylation defect.
Hypersensitive to ABA in respect to seed germination and stomatal behaviour..
Hypersensitive to ABA in seed germination and seedling growth.
hypersensitive to ABA in the early  developmental stages, including seed germination and post-germination seedling growth. In addition, seed germination in  the mutant also showed increased sensitivity to inhibition by osmotic stress conditions produced by high concentrations of  salt and mannitol. Further analyses indicated that increased stress sensitivity in the mutant may be a result of both ABA  hypersensitivity and increased accumulation of ABA under the stress conditions.
Hypersensitive to both salt (NaCl) and osmotic stress (mannitol).
Hypersensitive to copper deficiency. Seedling growth is impaired when plants are grown in soils containing low copper levels (e.g. 0.1 micromolar).
Hypersensitive to drought stress.
Hypersensitive to drought stress. Decreased sensitivity to ABA treatment during germination.
Hypersensitive to exogenous and endogenous ABA during germination due to accumulation of high levels of ABA.  The lengths of the main root, hypocotyl and stem of ahg2-1 were significantly shorter than those of the wild type. The growth rate of the main root was apparently reduced. The  leaf size (length and width) in ahg2-1 was reduced to just over half , but the number of rosette leaves was not affected markedly. The reduced size  of the ahg2-1 plant is due mainly to the reduced cell size, not  to a reduced number of cells. Fertility was not affected. Sensitive to salicylic acid
Hypersensitive to ionizing radiation and chemical mutagens
hypersensitive to low potassium media
hypersensitive to NaCl.
hypersensitive to NH4+
hypersensitive to oxidative stress
Hypersensitive to salt, glucose and osmotic stress. Hyperdormant. Slightly sensitive to ABA.
Hypersensitivity to ABA with reduced seed germination and retarded emergence of green cotyledons compared to WT. Transcription of CSD3 is decreased significantly in response to ABA treatment.
Hypersensitivity to mitomycin C.
Hypersensitivity to NaCl and LiCl but not to mannitol in root growth assays. Under NaCl stress, pop2-1 mutant did not overaccumulate Na+ and Cl- but showed a slight decrease in K+ content. Additionally, mutant roots exhibited substantial metabolic changes upon salt stress, including overaccumulation of amino acids and decrease in carbohydrates content.
Hypersensitivity to nonionic osmotic stress induced by sorbitol.
Hypersusceptible to infection with Pseudomonas syringae. Defective in perception of bacterial  lipopolysaccharide.
Hypertrophic meristem, defective patterning of leaves, upwardly curled leaves, increased adaxial character due to increased HD-Zip III gene expression, decreased accumulation of microRNAs. Phenotype provided by Stephen Grigg
Hypertrophic meristem, upwardly curled leaves, decreased accumulation of microRNAs.Phenotype provided by Stephen Grigg
Hypocotyl elongation is less inhibited than in wild-type plants in both FR and blue light. Hypocotyl length in rsf1 seedlings was intermediate between the wild type and a photoreceptor null mutant under both light conditions.
Hypocotyl explants of the rpd1-1 mutant formed root-primordium-like structures after 16 days of culture at the restrictive temperature (28?C) on root-inducing medium, whereas at the permissive temperature (22?C), they formed normal adventitious roots. The inhibitory effect of the rpd1 mutations on adventitious root formation was detected at the primordial stage after six days of culture.
Hypocotyl growth resistant (but not root growth) to 2,4-D inhibition compared to wildtype.
Hypocotyl phenotype is modest in mature, aerial parts of the plant.
Hypocotyls of etiolated mutants displayed cell swelling and elongation defects when grown on  salt containing media.
Hypomorphic allele identified as an intragenic supressor of stip-d activation tagged allele. Homozyous plants show about 80% seedling lethality. Other phenotypes include hyponastic cotyledon and reduced root size. Expression of WUS is reduced and the domain of STM (a marker of meristems)reduced.Heterozygotes have 25% abnormal embryos with smaller meristems. Phenotype can be rescued with the addition of sucrose in the growth media.
Hyposensitive to red, far red and blue light.Seedlings have longer hypocotyls under increasing red, far red and blue light conditions.Reduced levels of seed germination  under increasing amounts of red and far red light. Under short day conditions leaves are smaller and less expanded.
iaa30-1 was found to  produce significantly less shoot apical meristem somatic embryogenesis than Col wild type.
Identical to the ein2-5 single mutant.There is no noticeable effect on hypocotyl length of dark grown plants supplemented with ethylene.
Immunoblot with &alpha;-gMDH antibodies showed that processing of pre-gMDH to gMDH no longer occurred in the homozygous mutant plant.
Immunolabeling of stem and root sections using using monoclonal antibodies specific for glucuronoxylans revealed strong fluorescence signals in the walls of interfascicular fibers and xylem cells in wild-type Arabidopsis, but only weak signals were detected in the corresponding tissues of mutant plants.
Impaired ability to close stomata in drought
Impaired circadian clock function.
Impaired cold acclimation.
Impaired degreening during seed maturation - embryos were green throughout seed development and seeds are green at maturity and first true leaves were already formed at this stage. Embryo at maturity had fewer protein bodies, instead, large vacuoles were observed in cotyledons. Freshly harvested seeds germinated on wet filter paper within 2-3 days. Chloroplasts were observed in cotyledons of mutants seedlings grown in dark as well as in the true leaves. Seed phenotype of abi3-6 is indistinguishable from abi3-3 allele.
impaired double fertilization
impaired freezing tolerance
impaired in mucilage release upon imbibition
Impaired in RNA Editing
Impaired NAD(P)H dehydrogenase activity
impaired pollen formation and seed production
Impaired stomatal response to ABA.  Higher proton extrusion in plants.
impaired vacuole formation and vacuolar transport; accumulates autophagosomes; defective endocytosis and intracellular transport.
Impairment of mitochondrial gene expression without affecting photosynthesis.
Inability to break down lipid bodies.
In addition to a shortening of the period, a temperature-dependent increase in the variance of period was seen for the mutant, with the variance increasing from 3.1 at 17?C to 18.0 at 27?C (F test P = 1.8x10-9). Although an increase in the variance of period with temperature was also observed for the wild type, this was not of the same magnitude (from 1.9 at 17?C to 3.8 at  27?C; F test P = 4.1x10-3).
In addition to having a reduced number of trichome branches, myb23 mutants have smaller trichomes.
In addition to the arrested embryo phenotype, aberrant cell divisions were also observed: These resulted in the formation of an elongated apical cell or embryo proper instead of the typical globular embryo in wild-type plants. A notable phenotype of the set09078 mutant is that ~19% of the mutant embryos displayed aberrant positioning of the division planes and asynchronous divisions. Furthermore, asynchronous divisions of the embryo proper and suspensor cells were observed.
In all homozygous embryos from late-heart to late-torpedo stages, 15% of their plasmodesmata (PD) exhibited branched morphology, in contrast with the single simple PD observed in wild-type embryos. Branched PD were randomly distributed throughout the whole body of embryos, and no variation in their frequency was observed among late-heart, early-torpedo, and late-torpedo stages.
In ambient air, the growth of the homozygote plant is arrested at early cotyledon stage. The seedlings die within 2 weeks. With elevated CO2, the plant grows slowly but is viable and fertile.
In blue light, the mutant has a shorter hypocotyl than in wild type, but shows a clear sensitivity to cytokinins.
In C24 genetic background. Early flowering under long day conditions (ca 13.5 leaves vs. 25 for normal sibs).Reduced fertility. ABA hypersensitivity as measured by seed germination and stomatal movement assays.
In chloroplasts from hma1 mutant lines, Cu content was halved with respect to chloroplasts from WT. Under high light (above 280 ?mol.m-2.s-1), hma1 mutants exhibited a strong photosensitivity phenotype leading to white leaves with restricted green regions.
Incompletely penetrant zygotic embryo lethality.  In heterozygotes, more than 20% of seeds are arrested at an early developmental stage. A percentage of ovules in the siliques  have enlarged integument cells and no visible embryos or embryos arrested at a very early stage.
In constant darkness chlorophyll is retained resulting in a stay-green phenotype.
In contrast to chloroplasts in the leaves, wild-type and mutant root plastids do not differ significantly in appearance. The root plastids appear to be some type of immature plastid or proplastid, as they contain a rudimentary internal membrane structure.
In contrast to the embryo, the endosperm of homozygous seeds developed normally up until seed maturation. During this period starch accumulated transiently in the endosperm cells of both the mutant and wild type. In desiccating homozygous seeds gaps were observed in the aleurone, a persistent layer of the endosperm. These cells appeared devoid of their endoplasm.
In contrast to the ku70 mutant, which undergo telomerase-dependent expansion to more than twice the normal length in a single generation, the ku70 tert double mutant displays accelerated telomere shortening and a precocious onset of genome stability.
In contrast to wild type, ABA levels did not increased rapidly after infection with the oomycete <i>Pythium irregulare</i>.
In contrast to wild type, anthocyanin accumulation did not occur in the senescing mutant rosette leaves.
In contrast to wild type, blue light does not inhibit hypocotyl elongation in the double mutant.
In contrast with wild-type plants, no Lea-containing peaks were found in extracts of the mutant.
In control experiments, multiplication of the bacterial <i>cor</i> mutant (in Col and Ler) at the surface of leaves was greatly reduced compared whereas it multiplied efficiently when infiltrated directly into the apoplast (and caused typical disease symptoms incluring necrosis and chlorosis). In the surface-inoculated mutant, the bacterial <i>cor</i> mutant multiplied efficiently.
Increased &#945;-amylase activity.
Increased abundance of miRNA precursors.
Increased accumulation of Tobacco and cauliflower mosaic virus coat proteins after innoculation.
Increased activity of axial meristems, reduced root growth and enhanced de-etiolation.
Increased anthocyanin accumulation. Collapsed trichomes.Brown discoloration around endodermis in the hypocotyl and root due to ectopic lignification. Guard cells are larger than WT due to swollen ventral sides. Swollen hypocotyl epidermis with uneven surface. Four-day old dark-grown seedlings have shorter, thicker hypocotyls than WT.   Cell wall analysis: reduced crystalline cellulose. Increased starch content. Neutral sugar content is same as WT. Increases protein. Increased uronic acid and decreased amount of methyl esterification.
Increased arsenate tolerance: increased survival rates of double mutant during germination and increased root growth of double mutant seedlings were observed at all arsenate concentrations tested.
Increased  arsenic tolerance
Increased axillary branching, reduced stature, reduced fertility.
Increased bioactive GA levels.
Increased cell wall extensibility, increased polysaccharide content.
Increased chlorosis in older leaves when compared with wild-type and smaller rosette diameter.  ggt1-2 plants bolted approximately 3 days earlier than the wild-type plants.  Yellowing leaves in the ggt1-2 mutant was caused by oxidative stress, lipid peroxidation levels increased
Increased cuticle permeability compared with WT.
Increased cytokinin resistance compared to double mutant ahk2-5 ahk3-7.
Increased delay in flowering time compared to both parental single mutants.
Increased endoreduplication in leaf tissues. Increased number of abaxial pavement cells. Leaves slightly elongated and serrated.Reduced cell numbers with a corresponding increase in cell size.
Increased extent and rate of cell death after exposure to FB1 when compared to wild type.
increased FLC mRNA, late flowering
Increased frequency of chains of dp3 and, to a lesser degree, of dp4 and dp5. Decreased abundance of chains between dp9 and dp16.
Increased HpaII cleavage of the 180-bp centromere repeats.  This reflects hypomethylation of the centromere.  Centromere repeats in interphase nuclei are decondensed relative to wild type.
Increased hypersensitivity to NaCl.Root growth is inhibited in the presence of 160mM NaCl. Defects may be due to reduced integrity of the plasma membrane as mutants leak electrolytes.
increased lateral root formation
Increased leaf chlorosis in response to Pseudomonas syringae pv tomato DC3000 innoculation.  Severely stunted growth.   Many plants do not produce seed.  Stunted plants have yellow, curled leaves, purple cotyledons and abnormal flower morphology.  Severity of phenotype is directly correlated with level of overexpression.
Increased leaf serration.
Increased length of hypocotyls in dark grown seedlings. Seeds that have been stratified at 4C for 3 days germinate faster. Increased sensitivity to ABA.
Increased levels of 8-oxo-G.
Increased levels of cis-zeatin riboside (cZR) and cis-zeatin riboside monophosphate (cZRMP) compared to wild type.
Increased levels of GA9.
Increased levels of malate in mutant (close to twice that in wildtype). Significant decrease in citrate levels and oxaloacetate.
Increased levels of Met, Ser, Val and S-methylmethionine (SMM) and decreased levels of Met-derived glucosinolates in leaves and seeds.
Increased levels of RGA protein.
Increased mechanosensitivity. syt1-2 protoplasts have reduced tolerance to mechanical stress and epidermal cells collapse more easily under mechanical pressure.
Increased meiotic recombination between divergent sequences tested using marker lines.
Increased meristem size. Vegetative meristems are are 30% larger than wild type. After bolting inflorescence meristems are enlarged and occasionally fasciated. Flowers occasionally produce extra organs in the first 3 whorls and always produced extra carpels. In most flowers only 4 of the 6 stamens develop to maturity. Pedicels are also elongated.
Increased number of lateral root meristems, greater than acr4 single mutant alone.
Increased number of lateral root meristems initate.
Increased number of lateral roots. Reduced acropetal auxin transport.
Increased number of root hairs and increased stomatal density in siliques.
Increased number of sepals.  Increased number of petals.  Additional stamen whorls.  Indeterminate floral meristems. Carpels enclose extra organs.  Stamen-petal chimeras.
Increased number of sepals and petals.Loss of organ boundary and identity, resulting in fused sepals and petaloid stamens.
Increased number of stomatal lineage ground cells (SLGCs) that fail to differentiate into stomata.  Excessive asymmetric division and meristemoid formation in cotyledons.
Increased number of stomatal lineage ground cells (SLGCs) with respect to single er mutant.
Increased number of trichome branches.
increased number of vascular cell files with intervening procambial and phloem cell files; protoxylem differentiation occurred sporadically along the root
increased number of vascular cell files with  intervening procambial and phloem cell files; protoxylem differentiation  occurred sporadically along the root
Increased numbers of lateral shoots. Delayed axillary bud development, lateral shoot outgrowth, and flowering time of lateral inflorescences.
Increased ploidy level of 64C.
Increased primary root length in the cipk8 mutants. Expression of AttDT, BOR1, CHL1 and NRT2.1, NIA1, NIA2 and NiR was reduced in the mutant.
Increased protein oxidation, nitration and glycation of specific amino acid residues during darkness
Increased  protochlorophyllide accumulation under etiolated  growth conditions. When  etiolated rfd1 mutants were transferred to light, the overaccumulated  chlorophyll precursor caused photooxidative  damage and the respective seedlings subsequently died. When grown in constant light or dark?light  cycles, the mutant showed completely white cotyledons. True leaves were similarly bleached under  normal light conditions although growth under dim light  (5?20 mM photons m?2 s?1) results in a slight greening. On  sucrose-supplemented media rfd1 developed Fluorescent  phenotype associated with a lack  of transcript initiation from the AtRibA1 promoter
Increased rate of leaf initiation. Reduced apical dominance. Slightly later flowering than normal sibs.
Increased red light signaling in the control of deetiolation.  Disrupted rhythmicity of central-clock and clock-output gene expression in constant red light.
Increased resistance to Aluminum toxicity. Root growth not as inhibited when grown on Al as compared to wild type.
Increased resistance to Botrytis infection: the visual phenotypes of the leaves 3 days after inoculation show that the lesions larger than the original infection site represent only 5% of lesions compared to 75% in WT plants.
Increased resistance to osmotic and ionic stress. Germination of mutants is better than wild type when grown on 200-250mM NaCl.
Increased resistance to Pseudomonas syringae pv tomato DC3000 colonization. 72hrs post-innoculation, CFU/leaf disc values were >94% lower tahn WT. Inhibition of infection is correlated with curtailed chlorosis and there fore programmed cell death.  Morphologically indistinguishable to WT.
Increased resistance to the virulent Pseudomonas  syringae (both pathovars: tomato and maculicola), demonstrated by an absence of macroscopic lesions upon infection. Small lesions comprising one or a few dead cells persist in the mutant.
Increased root elongation, dry weight, and proline accumulation.
Increased root hair density.
increased ROS-induced cell death (ROS: reactive oxygen species); decreased seed content; more resistant to bacterial pathogen Pseudomonas syringae
Increased salt tolerance.
Increased salt tolerance. Seeds germinated in the presence of up to 200mM NaCl germinate with  90% efficiency compared to 1% for wild type.
Increased seed and organ size. Seed mass increased to 132% of WT. Increased seed and ovule volume. Increased cotyledon area. Increased embryo size. Increased total seed yield per plant.Increased integument size. Large flowers with extra petals and carpels. Enlarged, somewhat flattened siliques. Round, large leaves. Thick stems.   All organs have more cells than WT, but cell size is the same as WT.   Longer lifespan than WT.
Increased seed dormancy, dark green dwarf phenotype, delayed flowering and reduced fertility.
Increased seed dormancy.
Increased seed size, largely due to increased size of the embryo. Embryonic root epidermal cells increased 15% in number and 30% in size compared to wild-type.
Increased seed size due to proliferation of cell division in inner and outer integuments. Pleiotropic effects include thick twisted stems, late flowering, and reduced fertility.
Increased sensitivity to ABA. Application of .5micromolar ABA inhibits germination.
increased sensitivity to chilling and freezing temperature.
Increased sensitivity to delay in root hair emergence in response to exogenous asparagine. Increased accumulation of asparagine in root when grown on medium containing asparagine as a single nitrogen source. Increased seed size under conditions of nitrogen deficiency. Increased concentration of free asparagine and other free amino acids in seed when grown under low illumination.
Increased sensitivity to DNA damage,decreased gene silencing as measured by expression of reporter genes, small plants, decreased trichome number, early flowering in long days,decreased cell division, short roots.
Increased sensitivity to drought and osmotic stress. Mutants have increased water loss under drought stress due to increased stomatal aperture size.
Increased sensitivity to drought stress.
Increased sensitivity to gamma radiation and the cross-linking reagent cisplatin.  Reduced efficiency of somatic homologous recombination.
Increased sensitivity to glucose. Plants grown on 3% glucose have shorter roots. Also have increased anthocyanin levels, increased starch content, when grown on 2-3% glucose.
Increased sensitivity to glucose. When grown on 2-3% supplemental glucose, roots are shorter than wt and reduced chlorophyll levels. Increased rate of dark grown growth when grown on supplemental glucose. Increased sensitivity to ABA.
increased sensitivity to heat
Increased sensitivity to high temperatures.Plants wilt more quickly after transfer from 22  to 40C.er-105 leaf cells had increased ion leakage than those in the wild-type Col-0 (82% vs. 60%) and  a higher occurrence of plasma membrane disruption (71% vs. 46%) 24 h after heat treatment.
increased sensitivity to inhibition of root elongation by exogenous asparagine
Increased sensitivity to salt (130 or 140 mM NaCl ) and osmotic (350 or 400 mM mannitol) stress.
Increased sensitivity to salt stress.
increased sensitivity to the DNA-damaging chemicals bleomycin and mitomycin C (MMC)
Increased sensitivity to tunicamycin an inhibitor of N-linked glycosylation and inducer of ER stress. After treatment mutant seedlings display growth defects and chlorophyll loss. Mutant roots show increased levels of H2O2 and induction of programmed cell death.
Increased sensitivity to UV-C radiation.
Increased starch phosphorylase activity compared to wild type.
Increased stomatal density, paired stomata, deficient developmental phenotypes, such as etiolation, late flowering, and dwarfness, fully expanded rosette leaves were smaller than those of the wild type, increased epidermal cell density in the abaxial epidermis of the mutant leaves, higher number of stomatal cells (meristemoids, GMCs, and stomata) and non-stomatal cells.
Increased susceptibility to <i>P. irregulare</i> compared with the wild type.
Increased susceptibility to Botrytis infection.
Increased susceptibility to fungal pathogens B. cinerea and A. brassicicola. Early flowering when grown under 12 hour light regime. Reduced thickness of the cell walls.
Increased susceptibility to fungal pathogens B. cinerea and A. brassicicola. Early flowering when grown under long days.
Increased susceptibility to P. syringae infection. Reduced callose deposition suggests defect in innate immune response.
Increased susceptibility to T-DNA transformation.
Increased thickness of major veins in juvenile and adult rosette leaves.  Adult rosette leaves are smaller and have more veins per square area  than those of wild type.  Increased vein thickness is attributable to an increased number of both xylem and phloem cells as well as an increased number of procambial cells in between.  Polar auxin transport in mutant stems is 66.2% of that in wild type.  Mutants are fully fertile and produce normal flowers.
Increased tolerance of salt stress. Seedlings germinate in the presence of high concentrations of NaCl.
Increased trichome branching.
increased trichome cell size and nuclear DNA content without affecting the number of trichome branches
Increase in free-maltose content in leaves.
Increase in stomatal index with respect to wild type.
Increase in SUMO conjugates and decrease in free SUMO.
Increase in the Chl a/b ratio.
Increase in the frequency of trichomes with more stems.
Increase in the number of trichome branch points. Most mutants have four branch points but that number can range from 2 to 7.
Increase in trans-zeatin (16-fold) and trans-zeatin ribosides (9-fold) concentrations. 50-fold concentration increase for zeatin-O-glucoside.
Increase of about 40% of NADPH levels.
Increasingly retarded development of seedlings when grown on media containing increasing concentrations of Cu.
In dark controls, hypocotyl growth was unaffected by the mutations and the cotyledons remained fully closed. Compared with those in the wild type, hypocotyl growth inhibition and  cotyledon unfolding responses to hourly FR pulses were significantly greater in the mutant.
In darkness, the mutant is resistant to cytokinins (only small decrease in hypocotyl length).
Indehiscent siliques.
Indeterminate floral meristem.  No carpels. Instead, stamens are continually produced following a spiral phyllotaxy.
indeterminate floral meristems, producing extra whorls of stamens and an indefinite number of carpels; unregulated cell division in the center of the flower with normal floral organ identity; plants also show other developmental defects including absence of axillary inflorescence meristems and abnormally shaped cotyledons, leaves, sepals, stamens and carpels
Indeterminate floral meristems. Carpels enclose extra organs.  Short siliques.
Indistinguishable from the respective cop1 mutants when grown in darkness.
Indistinguishable from wild type in the early stages of development. Phenotypic differences become evident as the plant age.
Indistinguishable from wildtype under normal or salt stress growth conditions.
Indole-3-acetonitrile (IAN) treatment restored camalexin synthesis in cyp79B2 cyp79B3 plants that are unable to produce camalexin due to failure to synthesize indole-3-acetaldoxime (IAOx).
In double homozygous progeny, significant reduction of CSN1, CSN6, CSN7, and CSN8 and in a very slight  reduction of CSN4. In the case of CSN3, the complete loss of function of CSN5 results in the accumulation of a larger and possibly modified CSN3 form, whereas the normal (smaller) CSN3 form is present predominantly in wild type.
In double mutant carpels, two rows of primordia arise, extending along the length of the ovary, most of which subsequently develop into ovules (mostly morphologically abnormal).
In double mutant flowers, sepal fusion occurred more often and to a greater extent than in either single mutant.
In double mutant seedlings grown on CPTA, a partial rescue of the bps1 phenotype was observed.
Induction of all chitooligosaccharide-  responsive genes was blocked in the mutant. Mutant showed more susceptibility to fungal pa  thogens but had no effect on bacterial infection, neither affected the  SA- and jasmonic acid/ethylene-responsive pathways.
Induction of germination by treatment with red light is significantly inhibited.
In emf2-10 flowers the margin was less well defined, so that the elongated cells often extended to the margin. In addition, the sepals were more concave or boat shaped than wild type. Both features may have contributed to restricting bud opening.
In etiolated seedlings, hypocotyl length is less than 10% of that of wild type control and the cotyledons were open.
In evn-2/EVN plants, 20% of ovules are unfertilized. In unfertilized ovules the pollen tube continues to grow in the female gametophyte and does not release sperm cells.Does not transmit through the pollen.
In evn-2/EVN plants, 22% of ovules are unfertilized. In unfertilized ovules the pollen tube continues to grow in the female gametophyte and does not release sperm cells.Does not transmit through pollen.
In evn-3/EVN heterozygotes 28% of ovules are unfertilized, in those ovules the pollen tubes do not rupture but continue to grow. Does not transmit through the pollen.
Infection of Col-0 plants with PtoDC3000 resulted in lesions that were restricted to  infection sites, whereas infection of mutant lines produced leaf chlorosis followed by spreading necrosis 4 days after infection. However, bacterial growth in Col-0 and bak1 mutant lines did not differ. Infection of bak1 mutants with strains PtoAvrRpm1, PtohrcC2, or Pph resulted in symptoms and bacterial growth rates that were indistinguishable from those on Col-0.
Infection with cucumber mosaic virus (CMV) revealed an overaccumulation of CMV RNA compared to wild type.
Inflorescence apices have a reduction in polar auxin transport.
Inflorescences take 7-10 days longer than ap1 cal mutant to begin producing flowers.
Inflorescence stem failed to curve upward even after 6 h of horizontal gravistimulation. Plant size not affected in this mutation, inflorescence stem twisted as the elongated, and the lateral branches twisted downward. Reduced gravitropic response of ethyolated hypocotyls. Root gravitropism was normal.
Inflorescence stems and hypocotyls of mutant plants showed abnormal gravitropic response, while root gravitropism was normal.
Inflorescence stems from the homozygous mutants have smaller xylem vessels and smaller phloem areas compared to WT plants.  Inflorescence apices also have a reduction in polar auxin transport.
Inflorescence stems of mutant plants showed abnormal gravitropic response, while gravitropism in hypocotyls and roots was not altered.
Inflorescence stems of mutant plants showed delayed and reduced gravitropic response in horizontal gravistimulation experiments. Ethyolated hypocotyls and roots showed normal positive gravitropism. Lateral branches grew nearly horizontally, however, no other morphological defects were detected in mutant plants. Growth rate of inflorescence stems was slightly reduced, but the overal size of the mutant plants were the same as wild type.
Inflorescence was shorter in stature than the wild-type inflorescence. In addition, two to three more paraclades developed in this mutant than in wild-type plants.
information not available
In FR, fhl/fhy1 fails to inhibit hypocotyl elongation and exhibits a hypocotyl as long as phyA with closed cotyledons.
In general, mutant plants grow normally and do not exhibit any readily apparent alterations in morphology, except that they are slightly smaller than the wild type. In addition, mutant plants tend to grow slightly more slowly than do wild-type plants.
In heterogygous plants, 26% of ovules are aborted, compared to 9% of ovules in wild type siblings.
In heterozygous plants, 26% of ovules are aborted, compared to 7% of ovules in wild type siblings.
In heterozygous plants, 26% of ovules are aborted compared to 6% of ovules in wild type siblings.
In heterozygous plants, 33% of ovules are aborted, compared to 11% of ovules of wild type siblings.
In heterozygous plants, 37% of ovules are aborted, compared to 4% of ovules in wild type siblings.
In heterozygous plants, 39% of ovules are aborted compared to 6% for wild type siblings.
In heterozygous plants, 42% of ovules are aborted, compared to 11% of ovules of wild type siblings.
In heterozygous plants, 56% of ovules are aborted, compared to 5% in wild type siblings.
Inhibited growth when exposed to high light.  Some leaves exhibited symptoms of yellowing.
Inhibition of cell elongation, right-handed root twisting, left-handed leaf petiole twisting, suppression of root-waving, reduced trichome branching, perturbed microtubule organization such as increased longitudinal and oblique positions in root caps.
Inhibition of root elongation, dwarf, sterile, rapid senescence in mature leaves
Inhibition root, shoot, flowers and siliques growth when Boron was supplied at concentrations of <10 uM.
In homozygotes, no RPL23aB transcript is detected by RT-PCR. Presumed knockout. Homozygotes have WT phenotype wrt rate of development, morphology, flowering or fecundity. Venation patterns in laves also same as WT.
In homozygotes derived from the SALK parent  line, mutants have growth retardation, increased trichome branch number and increased susceptibility to fungus.
In homozygous plants 20% of ovules fail to form seeds. Ovules that do not produce seeds do not produce embryo sacs. Among the remaining ovule that do form embryo sacs and embryos more than 50% of the embryos abort at various stages. With fewer seeds the siliques of homozygous plants are shorter. Later formed flowers have non-dehiscent anthers.
In LD-grown, double mutant plants bolted at a similar time to WT controls. In SDs, they bolted 10 days later than WT plants but much earlier than ctr1-1 single-mutant plants.
In leaf sections, mesophyll cells are frequently highly enlarged with one large nucleus. In some cases, the enlarged cells possesse incomplete cell walls and contain several nuclei.
In leaves, &#946;-ring-hydroxylated xanthophylls (lutein, violaxanthin, neoxanthin) are still synthesized albeit at lower levels than wildtype (Ws) or either single mutant. Neoxanthin and violaxanthin were reduced by 90% and 65%, respectively. 30% increase in lutein.  &#946;-Carotene content is unchanged and &#946;-cryptoxanthin was not detected. &#946;-Carotene-derived xanthophylls are produced at 20% of wildtype capacity.
In leaves, 25% increase in zeinoxanthin levels; 25% and 35% reduction in violaxanthin and lutein, respectively; %beta;-Carotene increased by 35%; all in relation to single mutant lut1-2.
In leaves, 30% and 45% decrease in violaxanthine and neoxanthine, respectively, and 18% increase in lutein compared to wildtype. &#946;-Carotene content is unchanged and monohydroxy xanthophyll &#946;-cryptoxanthin was not detected.
In leaves, 80% decrease in lutein content, accumulation of   monohydroxy xanthophyll &#946;-cryptoxanthin, and twofold larger xanthophyll cycle carotenoid pool (violaxanthin + antheraxanthin + zeaxanthine).  &#946;-Carotene and neoxanthin content remains largely unchanged.
In leaves, apart from small decrease in neoxanthine, carotenoid composition not significantly altered compared to wildtype.  &#946;-Carotene content is unchanged and monohydroxy xanthophyll &#946;-cryptoxanthin was not detected.
In leaves, TAS3 ta-siRNAs were below detectable levels, whereas TAS1 and TAS2 ta-siRNAs were detectable. By contrast, in flowers, levels of TAS3 ta-siRNA remained unchanged, whereas levels of TAS1 and TAS2 ta-siRNAs were reduced.
In leaves, the only carotenoids significantly changed in the double mutant were &#946;-carotene and lutein.
In leaves: dramatic alteration in carotenoid composition: more than twice the levels of &#946;-carotene compared to wildtype. Reduction of 95% and 60% for neoxanthin and violaxanthin compared to wildtype. Zeaxanthin and antheraxanthin totally absent.  &#946;-Carotene-derived xanthophylls (violaxanthin + zeaxanthin + antheraxanthin + neoxanthin) only account for 5% of total carotenoids compared to 25 to 30% in wildtype. Lutein content is unchanged in the triple mutant compared to lut1 b1 and lut1 b2 double mutants, but zeinoxanthin has more than doubled compared to any of the lut1 genotypes.
In long day conditions, no significant difference in flowering behaviour between mutant and wild-type.
In mature wild-type fruit, stage 17, breakdown of cells within the transmitting tract has been completed and the mature two-cell layered septum has formed. In ntt mutants, cellular breakdown has not occurred, leaving several layers of cells between the two epidermal walls.
In mutant leaves, PSII photoinhibition is more pronounced, and PSII recovery proceeded at a slower rate relative to wild-type leaves. Lipid peroxidation is not detected by TL measurements either in wild-type leaves or mutant leaves. Determination of chlorophyll, fatty acid, and MDA confirmed that tocopherol deficiency in mutant leaves does not increase oxidative stress during long-term exposure of plants to high light stress at low temperature.
In mutant plants, many mitochondria are arranged in large clusters of tens of organelles in addition to singletons that had a distribution resembling the wild type.  There is a series of whole-plant defective phenotypes including lower biomass, shorter roots, and shorter etiolated hypocotyls. In additions, plants show greater numbers of dead root cells and general transcriptome reprogramming.
In mutant plants transferred to constant light after entrainment in light:dark conditions (12 h of light:12 h of darkness), the period of Lhcb1*1 circadian oscillations was ~3 h shorter than that in wild-type plants grown under the same conditions. On the first day of the experiment, the timing of the increase of Lhcb1*1 RNA in cca1-1 plants was almost identical to that in wild-type plants. However, by the fourth day of the experiment, the Lhcb1*1 RNA peaked much earlier in cca1-1 than in wild-type plants.
In mutant seedlings, hypocotyl swelling is constitutively observed both at 21?C and 31?C (although slightly more important in the latter case).
In plants expressing 4xMyc:bZIP17, the 84 kD fusion protein is processed to a 46-kD protein in salt-treated seedlings. The size of the cleavage product is consistent with proteolysis occurring at or near the transmembrane domain. No intermediate product,  indicative of cleavage at the canonical S1P site, is observed, but these intermediates are often short-lived. Salt treatment elevates the levels of the 46 kD cleavage product, suggesting a post-transcriptional increase in the levels of this protein. The 84 kD 4xmyc:bZIP17 precursor also accumulates at higher levels following salt treatment, but this change is not sufficient to account for the total increase observed for the 46 kD cleavage product.
In plants expressing mGFP:bZIP17, the fusion protein appears to co-localize with a fluorescent ER marker and to be excluded from the nucleus in seedlings grown on normal agar. However, the protein seems to relocalize to the nucleus following a salt treatment.
In populations containing the natural variant allele of ICA1those with the allele an increased sensitivity to high temperature and growth defects when grown at high temps (27-28C). The defects include delayed growth, abnormal leaf shapes, abnormal phyllotaxy. Plants show defects in cell cycle regulation with a block in G2/M under high temperatures. Plants are also more susceptible  to DNA damage under normal and high temperatures.
In rbe-3 flowers, second-whorl petals are often reduced in size or altered in appearance. Petals with staminoid characteristics, stamens, filaments or the absence of organs can all be found in the second whorl of rbe-3 mutants.
In seeds, 10% decrease in lutein content, nearly twofold increase in antheraxanthin, and 30% increase in zeaxanthin. Vialaxanthin and neoxanthin not significantly different from wildtype. Increase total level of &#946;-carotene-derived xanthophylls.
In seeds, carotenoids levels were reduced to 40% of those of wildtype. &#946;-Carotene-derived xanthophylls present at 10% of wildtype levels (same as in leaves). Zeaxanthin, antheraxanthin, violaxanthin and neoxanthin were reduced to 40, 50, 90 and 80% of wildtype levels.
In seeds, lutein content is unchanged; zeaxanthin, violaxanthin and neoxanthin are decreased; antheraxanthin is increased (all relative to wildtype). Increase total level of &beta;-carotene-derived xanthophylls.
In seeds, lutein content reduced by 30%. No zeinoxanthin accumulation.
In seeds, similar amounts of carotenoids relative to lut1 b1. Intermediate compared to Col and Ws parents. Greater levels of individual and total &#946;-carotene-derived xanthophylls compared to lut1 b1.
In seeds, similar amounts of carotenoids relative to lut1 b2. Intermediate compared to Col and Ws parents. Higher levels of lutein compared to lut1 b2.
In seeds, total carotenoid levels 35% lower than that of lut1 b1 and lut1 b2 but lutein still accounts for 80% of total carotenoids. Most &#946;-carotene-derived xanthophylls are significantly reduced compared to aforementioned double-mutants. 4- to 20-fold increase in &#946;-carotene relative to other genotypes.
Insensitive to high-glucose repression of chlorophyll accumulation in seedlings.
Insensitive to high-glucose repression of cotyledon expansion, chlorophyll accumulation, true-leaf development and root elongation. The response is specific to glucose but not to osmotic changes.
Insensitive to methyl jasmonate inhibition of growth.
insensitive to synthetic CLV3 peptide; stem cell expansion; increased number of floral organs.
Insensitive to the primary root growth inhibition caused by low phosphorous.The aerial parts are phenotypically similar to the wild type, except that these plants flowered 3-5 days earlier than wild type plants. Have normal root elongation and cell division.
Insensitive to the uridine analogue fluorouridine.
Insensitive to victorin 1, microbial toxin produced by the fungus Cochliobolus victoriae.
Insertion causes a reduction in mRNA by 70-80% but protein still present. Not a null allele.
In short day conditions, mutant formed a greater number of cauline leaves.
In short day conditions mutant formed fewer rosette leaves before bolting.
In short days (SD), flowering time is unaffected. rsf1 plants were indistinguishable from wild type both in LD and SD using two criteria to measure flowering time (days until flowering and leaf number at flowering).
In short days plants have delayed growth and were late flowering.In long day conditions, plants also had delayed growth but flowering time was unaffected. Lacks ADP-Glc PPase activity in leaves and no starch can be found in leaves or roots.
Interfascicular cambium based tissue formation was decreased by 40% compared to wild type.
Intermediate delay in flowering time compared to both single mutants.
Intermediate phenotype of <i>bri1</i> lines. Slightly larger and more fertile than plants with strong alleles <i>bri1-3</i> and <i>bri1-4</i>.
In the absence of ABA, wild-type seeds germinated only after red light irradiation, while the mutant germinated irrespective of light conditions. In the presence of ABA, both Col-0 and pil5 seeds failed to germinate even after red light irradiation. However, careful observation revealed that although radicles did not protrude from the endosperm layer of these seeds, the testa was ruptured.
In the absence of ABA treatment, root elongation of ggt1-1 was reduced nearly 50% compared to wild-type.
In the absence of vernalization, the double mutant flowered at the same time as the fca-1 single mutant.
In the absence of vernalization, this mutant flowered later than the fca-1 single mutant.
In the dark and under all light conditions tested, loss of function for both  CSN6 proteins (double homozygous progeny) results in lethality at the seedling stage and in a photomorphogenic phenotype indistinguishable from the fusca-type  phenotype of the null cop/det/fus mutants described for the other CSN subunits.
In the double homozygous progeny, significant reduction of CSN1, CSN3, CSN4, CSN7, and CSN8. The only subunits not affected are CSN2 and CSN5.
In the double mutant, the amount of ectopic lignin was reduced in hypocotyls and entirely absent in the root.
In the double mutant plants, fertile stamens were replaced by sterile petaloid stamens.
In the double mutant progeny, great reduction in vascular development.
In the double mutants, first-whorl carpels and staminoid carpels were often wider than in ap2-2. These organs had the appearance of several fused organs but were only connected to the base of the flower in the central part of the organ and were in a position normally occupied by a single organ. In addition, first-whorl organs were often fused along much of their length. All of the first-whorl organs were sometimes fused such that the fourth whorl carpel poked through a ring of tissue. Cells present along the margin of fusion resembled the epidermal cells normally present on the abaxial replum of wild-type carpels.
In the heterozygote plants, embryos from a single silique were essentially  indistinguishable early in the morphogenic phase of development. However, beyond the heart stage a segregation ratio emerged as approximately 25% of the seeds began to develop more slowly. Development was progressively retarded, eventually arresting at the torpedo stage.
In the homozygous mutant, stunted growth and smaller leaves, siliques, and flowers compared with the wild type. Although the leaf size was considerably smaller  than the wild-type leaf, the trichomes of the mutants were the same size.
In the homozygous mutant, uneven distribution of cell wall deposition compared with the wild type. Additionally, the region that separates cells, consisting of residual primary cell walls, is wider and exhibits less contrast in the mutant compared with the WT.
In the homozygous mutant cell wall, decrease of cellulose content (~25%) and notable reduction in xylose in stems and roots (>50%).
In the homozygous mutant progeny, CSN3, CSN1 and CSN5 were all absent from the COP9 signalosome , although CSN5 could be found exclusively in the monomeric form.
In the homozygous mutant progeny, embryo development was arrested at the early globular stage. Although the normal embryos continued to develop, the arrested embryos subsequently became shriveled and finally degenerated. The mutant embryos never reached the heart stage but arrested by the early globular stage. Despite the aberrant embryo development phenotype, no developmental defect was observed during endosperm development in the mutant ovules.
In the homozygous progeny, anthocyanin accumulation (purple coloration) in the cotelydons of developing embryos.
In the homozygous progeny, dark purple seeds.
In the homozygous progeny, the mutation leads to CSN1, CSN3, CSN4, CSN6, and CSN8 instability, accompanied by a mild reduction of CSN5.
In the homozygous progeny, the mutation triggers the instability of CSN1, CSN3, CSN5, CSN6, and CSN7. The only subunits that do not seem do be significantly affected are CSN2 and CSN4.
In the homozygous progeny:  During early stages of embryogenesis the  development of mea-1 embryos is indistinguishable  from wild-type siblings in cleared  or sectioned specimens. Visible differences  between wild-type and mea-1 embryos  began at the late globular stage. Globular mea-1 embryos show excess  cell proliferation and enlarge radially  symmetrical. When wild-type embryos  reach the mid to late heart stage, sibling  mea-1 embryos are still globular and contain  small vacuolated cells with curvilinear cell  walls and sometimes irregular cell divisions  in the ground tissue and procambium. Suspensor  and hypophysis are normal, and cotyledons  initiate synchronously as in the  wild type. Thus, despite increased cell proliferation  and occasional irregular cytokinesis,  morphogenetic progression is normal.  However, each stage is prolonged and includes  more division cycles, and morphogenesis  is delayed. As a consequence, giant  heart stage mea-1 embryos  are present along with late torpedo or cotyledonary  stage wild-type embryos. mea-1  heart stage embryos have supernumerary  cell layers. When wild-type siblings are  fully differentiated, most mea-1 embryos  have reached the late heart stage and are up  to 10 times larger than normal. mea embryos  degenerate during desiccation. These results  suggest that mea controls cell proliferation  during embryogenesis, allowing morphogenesis  to progress normally, albeit  slowly.  Endosperm development in mea-1 seeds  is indistinguishable from that of the wild  type at early stages. When cellularization  begins normally in wild-type seeds at the  transition from the globular to the heart  stage, no cellularization is observed in sibling  mea-1 seeds. Although nuclear divisions  take place more slowly in mea-1 endosperm,  the distribution of endosperm nuclei  is as in the wild type. Partial cellularization  occurs at the micropyle when mea-1  embryos reach the late heart stage in desiccating  seeds, but because fewer nuclei have  been generated, most of the central cell is  devoid of nuclei. Thus, in mea-1 seeds, the  development of both fertilization products  is delayed but morphogenesis proceeds normally,  and it appears that the embryo shows  increased cell proliferation at the expense  of the endosperm.
In the homozygous progeny (seeds), the development of the zygotic embryo was already delayed at the globular stage, and was completely arrested at the heart stage compared with the normal embryo.
In the hypocotyl of light-grown Arabidopsis seedlings, chloroplasts are well developed. The morphology and distribution of chloroplasts of the mutant is indistinguishable from those of wild type only at the upper part of the hypocotyl. However, a reduced number of chloroplasts, which are pale green, are observed at the middle part of the mutant. In the lower part of the hypocotyl, the number of chloroplasts is reduced in wild-type plants; however, the  mutant showed only a few small and  transparent plastids.
In the kinesin-13a-1 homozygous  mutant, trichomes predominantly had four to five  branches, instead of the two in the wild type
In the mutant, about 2% of the trichomes showed a cluster phenotype. In clusters, two stems were usually formed that appeared to separate just above the epidermal surface giving the trichome a moose-horn-like appearance.
In the mutant, pollen tubes have considerable difficulty growing within the transmitting tract, causing them to terminate travel prematurely and frequently to leave the transmitting tract.
In the mutant, the ABA levels are reduced to around 20% of those of wild type.
In the mutant, the ABA levels are reduced to around 50-60% of those of wild type.
In the mutant's homozygous progeny, mature rosette leaves were retarded in growth. Secondary and tertiary veins in mutant leaves were thicker than in the wild type, and their diameter was commensurate with that of the primary vein. The organization of leaf mesophyll into palisade and spongy parenchyma cells was lost, and the leaf surface was extremely curled. This deformation in the mutant leaf was already visible in  cotyledons. In addition, leaf cross sections revealed that mesophyll cells, in contrast with wild-type plants, do not contain fully differentiated chloroplasts.
In the partially defective mutant plants, an attenuated hypersensitive response was observed at most plant-pathogen interaction sites,  and Noco2 mycelium was seen to emerge from these areas. At later times, there was less extensive pathogen growth and more extreme trailing plant cell death than was observed in the <i>rar1-11</i> mutants.
In the presence and absence of 100 mM NaCl, root morphology in double mutants is  comparable to wild type.
In the presence and absence of 100 mM NaCl, root morphology in double mutants is comparable with that of the wild type.
In the presence of 150 mM NaCl, the leaves of ein2-5 plants started bleaching after 4 days of treatment. The leaf growth of the ein2-5 plants was dramatically inhibited by 400 mM mannitol although remained green, the wild-type plants, by contrast, stayed green and continued to grow.
In the presence of 1 microM brassinazole, an inhibitor of brassinolide biosynthesis, the mutant hypocotyls display the same gravitropic time course as that of wildtype.
In the presence of kinetin, lateral root formation is not greatly inhibited, even at high concentrations.
In the presence of the DNA cross-linking agents mitomycin C, in contrast to wild  type, true leaves do not develop in the mutant, while expansion  of cotyledons, which does not require cell division, is  unaffected.
In the progeny of selfed heterozygous mutants, the homozygous vcs-7 embryos were also clearly distinguished from their siblings based on their SAM morphology (seven vcs-7 embryos out of 25 embryos examined). These vcs-7 embryos contained small dense cells in the SAM region; however, this region was not dome-shaped, nor were the cells organized into distinct layers.
In the siliques of mtppt-1 heterozygous plants approximately 26% of the fertilized seeds aborted during development.Aborting embryos of mtppt-1 heterozygous plants are arrested at the globular stage
In this line the wol-1 allele appears recessive compared to cre1-3.
In this mutant, the development of the photosynthetic apparatus was inhibited in the Suc+ medium, while the assimilation of nitrate was enhanced.
In transient root transformation assays with the oncogenic strain Agrobacterium tumefaciens A208, plants produce fewer tumors compared with wild-type plants.  In stable transformation assays, significantly reduced numbers of resistant (transformed) calli where observed in mutant plants vs. wild type ones.
In triple mutants the primary apical meristem terminates after germination-usually being consumed in the formation of a single terminal leaf. Growth can resume with the formation of new meristems however the phyllotaxy is abnormal.
in vitro: bulged pollen tubes of mutant pollen with a reduced rate of growth in vitro; altered deposition of some cell wall components; in vivo, male-specific transmission defect with mutant pollen tubes displaying aberrant growth in the ovary and reduced guidance at the micropyle.
In wildtype, 62% of the seeds were found in the bottom half of the silique (50-100 percentile) and 5% were found in the apical region (0-20 percentile). On average, seeds formed toward the center of the silique (50?60 percentile). No preference was observed for fertilization of the  most apical ovules. In the ntt mutant, most seed formed in the upper half of the carpel (90%).
IPMS1 mutants grew somewhat slower and had undulated leaves that tended to be slightly chlorotic. Showed an increase in the content of the aliphatic amino acid Val.
IRE1-1 transcript levels appear to be the same in ire1-1/IRE1-1 heterozygous and IRE1-1 homozygous (i.e. wild-type) plants. However, when heterozygotes are selfed, no ire1-1 homozygous mutants are recovered.
Irregular patterns of leaf and flower initiation.  Normal whorled phyllotaxy of floral organs but flowers with extra sepals and carpels and those with fewer petals and stamens are observed.  All mutant inflorescences and individual flowers are twisted spirally.  Mutant leaf margins are serrated.
Irregular wax crystals, reduced stature, small glosssy leaves,increased cuticle permeability. Increased accumulation of phytoceramides.
Irrespective of the light conditions, a reduction of the expression levels of two DELLA genes, GAI and RGA, was measured in this double mutant.
irx3-4 mutants show a severe defect in cellulose accumulation during development and only have 20% of the cellulose present in wild type plants at later developmental stages. But, they have a 50% increase in xylose levels per unit of cell wall material compared to wild type plants. Nevertheless, the frequency of side branch chains along the xylan backbone does not deviate from the normal pattern observed in wild type plants. In addition, these mutants appear to maintain the oligosaccharide leader sequence that is lost in parvus3, irx7, and irx8 mutants.
irx9 mutants of Arabidopsis showed a decrease in the abundance of xylan as revealed by cell wall analysis.
ispE-1 mutants die as albino lethal mutants. Photosynthetic pigments
/nare almost undetectable in these mutants and they completely lack thylakoid membranes.
ivory
Ivory, small
JA-Ile levels are roughly eight-fold lower in the jar1-8 mutant compared to wild type plants. The levels of JA, JA-Val, and JA-Leu are similar in the wild-type and mutant backgrounds, whereas the level of JA-Phe and JA-ACC are higher in the mutant.
JA-Ile levels are seven-fold lower in the jar1-1 mutant compared to wild type plants. The levels of JA, JA-Val, and JA-Leu are similar in the wild-type and mutant backgrounds, whereas the level of JA-Phe and JA-ACC are higher in the mutant. Although this mutant is moderately insensitive to MeJA in root growth assays, it is sensitive to JA-Ile.
jin1-9 shows the following phenotypes mostly in MeJA (methyl jasmonate) treated plants;  increased resistance to the root infecting fungal pathogen Fusarium oxysporum; increased susceptibility to cotton ballworm Helicoverpa armigera; reduced response to wounding; increased sensitivitivity to paraquat-mediated oxidative stress; increased levels of indole glucosinolates (i.e. indolyl-3-methyl glucosinolate and 4-methoxy-indolyl-3-methyl-glucosinolate); increased activity of the tryptophan biosynthetic pathway; reduced levels of flavonoid biosynthesis genes.
jkd-2 mutants have slightly shorter roots than wild type seedlings, and about 15% of them show premature lateral root initiation. They have fewer root meristem cells than wild type seedlings at 5 and 12 days post-germination.
jkd-4 mutants have slightly shorter roots than wild type seedlings, and about 15% of them show premature lateral root initiation. They have fewer root meristem cells than wild type seedlings at 5 and 12 days post-germination. But, there is a higher number of cells in the endodermal and cortical layers of the root in jkd-4 mutants than in WT seedlings. A loss of expression of SCR in the QC can be detected in jkd-4 mutants at the early heart stage and torpedo stages of embryonic development. A GFP:SHR fusion protein, normally confined to the nuclei of QC cells, is present in the cytoplasm most QC cells in jkd-4 mutants. However, GFP:SHR is observed in the nuclei of ground tissue cells in jkd-4 mutants.
kanamycin resistant, no visible phenotype; confirmed line isolated from original SALK line; homozygous for the insertion.
lacking C6, C7 and C8 aliphatic glucosinolates in the leaves
Lack of SIG4 in sig4-1 plants cause a strong decrease of ndhF precursor RNA and leads to a strong  decrease of NDH complex amount and activity
Lacks both zeaxanthin and tocopherols.
Lacks cotyledons and develops an altered shoot apex topology.  SAM formation is not suppressed. Significant reduction of sepals and sterility because of a reduction in number of gynoecia.  Position of the polar auxin transporter PIN1 is reversed in the embryo apex, resulting in altered polar auxin transport.
Lacks lutein.
Lacks root hairs.Root hairs initiate but do not develop further.
lacks the immutants protein
Lacks the intact COP9 signalosome (CSN).
lants are extremely small with a reduced number of leaves, leaves are sessile and the inflorescences are completely arrested. Cotyledons are relatively well expanded.Enhanced de-repression of KNOX gene expression.
Larger, but fewer chloroplasts than WT.   FtsZ ring formation is perturbed, and consequently chloroplast  division.
Larger but unbranched trichome cells compared to wild type.
Larger leaves than WT. Proximal expansion of the blade into the petiole domain.
Larger petals and sepals, thicker stems than wild type.  Accumulate more biomass in the form of flowers than wild type plants.
Larger petal size as a result of increased petal cell size.
larger plants, more resistant to stress
larger seedling size, enhanced elongation of rosette leaves and stems
late (after germination)  developmental arrest phenotype. In the  absence of sucrose as a reduced carbon source, the nmt1-1  seedlings greened but grew no further. Finally, the nmt1-1 line  was much more sensitive to high glucose concentration than the  wild type.
late flowering
late flowering; like fca, but less extreme.
late flowering; vernalization affects flowering time under both long days and short days; flowering occurs about 13 days later than wild type. Rosette leaf number at flowering was more than 2 times higher than in the wild type.
late flowering; vernalization has large effect on flowering time under both long days and short days; flowering occurs about 10 days later than wild type. Rosette leaf number at flowering was more than 2 times higher than in the wild type.
Late flowering. Flowers later than flc3 single mutant but earlier than ldl1/ldl2 double mutant.
Late-flowering A. thaliana accession characterized by an enlarged basal rosette, formation of aerial rosettes in the axils of stem leaves, and reversion of early floral meristems to indeterminate growth, a phenomenon known as floral reversion.
Late flowering in both long- and short-day growth conditions but retain a normal response to photoperiod compared to wild type.
Late flowering in both long and short days.
Late flowering in long day (16 h light/8 h dark) as well as short day (8 h light/16 h dark).
late flowering in long day growth conditions; narrower and more jagged rosette leaves than both wild-type plants; aberrant flower formation.
late flowering in long day growth conditions; narrower and more jagged rosette leaves than both wild-type plants; aberrant flower formation.
Late flowering in long-day photoperiods.
Late flowering in long days.
Late flowering in short days.
Late flowering under both long and short day conditions. Vernalization decreases flowering time. Increased number of rosette leaves.
Late flowering under long and short days. Normal flowering in response to GA and vernalization.
Late flowering under long and short days.Reduced salt tolerance. Reduced growth rate.
Late flowering under long-day photoperiod.
Late flowering under long-day photoperiod.  Increased number of rosette leaves.  Severe developmental retardation 14 days after germination.  Slightly reduced fertility.  Leaves slightly more curled and darker than wild-type plants.
Late flowering under long days, increased sensitivity to osmotic and salt stress.
Late flowering under long days.Average of 15-16 rosette leaves produced before flowering compared to average of 10 for normal siblings.
Late generation, starting around G3,  tert mutants have decreased root meristem size and overall root length. This is correlated with decreased telomere length in successive generations suggesting maintenance of meristem activity is coupled to telomere length.
lateral root formation in the mutant is insensitive to exogenous cytokinin; altered auxin response in lateral root primordium in the presence of exogenous cytokinin.
Lateral roots initiate and emerge at normal rates in mdr1-1 mutants, but they elongate ~50% more slowly than wild type lateral roots, and have a 60% reduction in acropetal auxin transport. Primary root elongation is not impaired in the mutants.
Lateral roots initiate and emerge at normal rates in mdr1-2 mutants, but they elongate ~50% more slowly than wild type lateral roots, and have a 60% reduction in acropetal auxin transport. Primary root elongation is not impaired in the mutants.
LBD36/ASL1 transcript levels were not reduced in bop1-4 bop2-11 plants.
LBD36/ASL1 transcript levels were reduced in bop1-1 plants.
Leaf architecture is grossly disturbed.
Leaf cells from mutant plants were slightly smaller than wild-type leaf cells and contained fewer chloroplasts per cell. Chloroplasts in mutant plants were smaller and distended in shape, with a large reduction in thylakoid membrane content and little evidence of grana stacking.
Leaf chlorosis, defect in chloroplast development.
leaf curling similar to that in clf-2. Both clf-2 and clf-2 rbe-3 produced an average of 4.0 second-whorl organs per flower. In clf-2 mutants these were almost exclusively small petals whereas the average number of small petals in clf-2 rbe-3 was 1.37. Second-whorl petals were most often replaced by spoonshaped petals, staminoid petals, petaloid stamens or stamens.
Leaf epifermal cell size is increased about three-fold compared to wild-type cells, in young as well as older leaves.
leaf expansion defects, early flowering, low fertility, and increased salt sensitivity. cpl2 mutant plants produced shorter hypocotyls than wild-type plants in the light, but were indistinguishable from wild type in the dark.
Leaf extracts of mutant plants contain less short-chain (3-methylsulfinylpropyl,  4-methylthiobutyl, and 4-methylsulfinylbutyl) and long-chain (5-methylsulfinylpropyl, 5-methylthiopropyl, 7-methylsulfinylheptyl,  7-methylthioheptyl, 8-methylsulfinyloctyl, and 8-methylthio-octyl) Met-derived glucosinolates. Concomitant with the decreases in alkylglucosinolates, the leaf extracts show increased levels of the indole glucosinolates indol-3-ylmethyl, 4-methoxyindol-3-ylmethyl, and 1-methoxyindol-3-ylmethyl glucosinolate. Because of the decrease in alkylglucosinolates and the increase in indole glucosinolates, the major glucosinolate accumulated in ref2 leaves is indol-3-ylglucosinolate.
Leaf incurvature; early flowering; flowers display partial homeotic transformations of sepals into carpels and of petals into stamens.
Leaf mesophyll cells in mutants contain fewer and larger chloroplasts than the wild type cells, which have about 120 chloroplasts at maturity. The mutant cells contain between 3 and 15 chloroplasts in fully expanded mesophyll cells. Chloroplasts frequently remain dumbbell.
leaf necrosis, dwarfism caused by salicylic acid accumulation
Leaf phenotypes are enhanced with respect to either single mutant, with deeply lobed margins and ectopic stipules present in the sinus of each lobe.
Leaf shape slightly altered: longitudinal length of blade more affected than lateral length. Impaired leaf vasculature.
leaf-wilting; when grown at 21-22C, mutant plants are smaller, have shorter siliques and are less fertile than the wild-type plants.  Growth phenotype is partially rescued at higher temperatures (25-26C); collapsed xylem with reduced cellulose content; more sensitive to osmotic stress and ABA.
Leaf wilting. The wilting was observed in the margins of old leaves, but not in young leaves. The overall size of mature mutant plants are smaller than wild type. Hypersensitive to dark stress. Increased drought tolerance.
Leaves, stems and sepals were lighter green than WT plants throughout the life cycle. Pigment content analyses demonstrated that mutant rosette leaves contained less chlorophyll and anthocyanin compared to WT.
Leaves and cotyledons are only weakly epinastic.
Leaves and flowers phenotyically similar to WT. More axillary shoots than zpr3-1d. Normal inflorescences and inflorescence stems.
Leaves are abaxialized. Adaxial surface has characteristics of abaxial leaf surfaces. Leaves appear rippled.
Leaves are curled slightly downward at the margins.
Leaves are larger, rounder and curve upward compared to wild type. Leaf lamina are cup shaped. Increased branding of trichomes.
Leaves are moderately adaxialized, stipules surrounding the entire leaf base.  Ectopic meristems are commonly formed at the base of the abaxial side of leaves.
Leaves are rounder and paler than wild-type.
Leaves are wilted after 30 min of dehydration under a laminar air unit.
Leaves expand more slowly than those of wildtype controls.
Leaves have 20% of wild-type ascorbate concentration.
Leaves have a serrated edge.  Sepals and petals are narrower and shorter than wt.  Mutant sepals develop jagged tissue at the tip.  Anthers are reduced with an altered shape and produce less pollen than wt.
Leaves of the mutant have about one-half the glucose phosphorylation capacity of wild-type leaves when grown under low or high light conditions.
Leaves of the mutant have a reduced rate of starch degradation at night. The mutant has starch levels comparable to that of wild type at the end of the light period, but high levels of starch at the end of the dark period.
Leaves remain small and dark green with little cell expansion under high light conditions, although the same number of leaves appeared at the same time as in the wild type.
leaves up-rolled, precocious expression of adult traits, reduced leaf number, small root system, reduced fertility as both a male and female parent.
lengthens the period of the clock in all conditions
Length of ron3-2 rcn1 primary root significantly shorter than parentals. Lateral root density of ron3-2 rcn1 is partially restored compared with ron3-2. Apical dominance  partially restored in the ron3-2 rcn1 double mutant. The ron3 mutation inhibited growth of primary and lateral roots and apical dominance, implying that ron3 is epistatic to rcn1 for these parameters. The internalization of PIN1 and PIN2 is significantly reduced in the double mutant compared to either parental line.
lesion mimic mutant; exhibits light conditional appearance of propagative HR (hypersensitive response)-like lesions along the vascular system.
Lesser ability to deal with photoinhibition.
Less galactose in root cell wall compared to wildtype. No difference in shoot cell wall monosaccharide composition.
Less inhibition of thiol synthesis was observed in the mutant.
Less or no increase in trichome production after GA treatment on the third cauline leaves.
Less sensitive to auxin. Reduced root gravitropism.  Suppressed auxin-dependent hypocotyl elongation at 29C.
Less sensitive to brassinolide than wildtype, in terms of dark-grown hypocotyl elongation.
Less sensitive to growth inhibition by tunicamycin than wt.
less tolerant to t-BOOH and diamide treatment
lethal
Lethal, upon germination, seedlings never recovered.
Lethal, with severe gametophytic effects.
Lethal mutation when grown on soil (seed stocks are maintained as heterozygotes).
Lethal when grown at 28C. At 18C some double mutants survive to adulthood. These plants display extreme dwarfism, delayed senescence, and complete sterility. At permissive temperatures eta2-1 enhances the auxin response defect but at high temperatures eta2-1 is epistatic.
Level of total carotenoid  not significantly different from wild-type.
Levels of chlorophyll are 41% of wild-type levels. When grown in the presence of the metabolic precursor 1,4-dihydroxy-2-naphtoate (NA), mutant plants exhibit wild-type levels of chlorophyll.
Levels of cZ are reduced in this mutant compared to those of wild type.
Levels of cZR and cZRMP are reduced in this mutant compared to those of wild type.
Levels of iPRMP, iPR, tZRMP, tZR. tZ-7-glucoside, tZ-9-glucoside and tZ-O-glucoside are all reduced to less than 20% of those of wild type.
Levels of iP-type and tZ-type cytokinins are unaffected in this mutant.
Levels of select capped mRNAs are elevated.
Levels of sinapoylmalate were reduced to 60-70% of those in wild-type leaves and the mutations had a similar impact on seed sinapoylcholine and sinapoylglucose content. The quantity and quality of lignin in mutant plants were unchanged relative to wild type.
lhcb1 lhcb6 double mutant show ABA insensitivity than wild-type in stomatal movement, including promotion of stomatal closure and inhibition of stomatal opening. The detached leaves of the double mutant lose more water than those of wild-type plants under dehydration condition, and that both young seedlings and mature plants of the double mutant have lower capacity to conserve their water during drought stress in comparison with wild-type plants. The ROS levels increase in the double mutants in comparison with wild-type plants in both the whole leaves and in guard cells. Low concentrations ABA treatments reduce ROS levels of double mutents in both whole leaves(1 to 10 &#956;M ABA application) and in guard cells(5 &#956;M ABA application).
lhcb6 cch double mutant shows ABA insensitivity than wild-type in stomatal movement, including promotion of stomatal closure and inhibition of stomatal opening, and the strength of the ABA insensitive phenotypes is comparable to that of the cch mutant,  stronger than that of the lhcb6 single mutant and lhcb1 lhcb6 double mutant.
LHY expression approaches arrhythmicity immediately after being transferred into constant-light conditions.  Mean levels of LHY are lower than in wild-type plants.
Li+ hypersensitive. Under low Li+ concentrations, germination of mutant seeds and elongation of roots were significantly reduced.
Light/dark-entrained lip1-2 seedlings released into low fluence red light have a shorter period (by ~1.5-2 hours) for both morning (CCA1, LHY) and evening (TOC1) oscillator genes as determined by northern blots.
Light-adapted mutant leaves revealed a decrease in chlorophyll concentration (chlorophyll a/b), a reduction in the chlorophyll a/b ratio and &#946;-carotene.
Light-dependent arsenic tolerance where the mutant shows a slightly increased arsenate tolerance when grown in the dark.
Light green leaves.
Light-grown hsr8 plants exhibited increased starch and anthocyanin and reduced chlorophyll content in response to glucose treatment. Dark-grown hsr8 seedlings showed glucose-hypersensitive hypocotyl elongation and development.
Light grown seedlings have a reduced hypocotyl length, as well as short, epinastic cotyledons.
Light-sensitive reduction of chlorophyll accumulation.
lip1-1 seedlings are early phase mutants showing a shortened period length in DD and LL (red light) conditions using CCR2:LUC+ and CAB2:LUC reporters. The shortened period length of ~1-2 hours is also observed in assays of rhythmic leaf movements. Dark-grown seedlings subject to temperature entraining still show cycling of the CCR2:LUC+ reporter, but the period length is shorter in lip1-1 mutants than in C24 control seedlings. lip1-1 mutants do not adjust their photoperiods in response to different fluence rates of constant red or blue light, unlike wild type seedlings. They are more sensitive than wild type seedlings to resetting pulses of light during the first portion of subjective night, but their responses are similar during most other portions of the circadian cycle. The period of CCA1:LUC+ and LHY:LUC+ (morning oscillator genes) is shorter under low fluence red light in lip1-1 than in the C24 parent line. Wild type seedlings growing in dim light/dark cycles, have similar levels of morning oscillator (LHY, CCA1) genes as lip1-1, but have higher transcript levels for the TOC1 evening oscillator. Hypocotyl length is reduced in lip1-1 mutant seedlings grown under constant red or blue light at all fluences, but matches wild-type hypocotyl length for seedlings grown in constant FR light or darkness. In all comparative experiments, both the lip-1 mutant and the C24 line referred to as the "wild type" or "parent" line carry the CAB2:LUC reporter.
Lipid catabolism during germination and early post-germinative growth was delayed in the acx2-1 mutant, with 3-day-old seedlings accumulating long-chain acyl-CoAs. Mutant plants have reduced medium- and long-chain Acyl-CoA enzyme activity. Seedling growth and establishment in the absence of an exogenous supply of sucrose was unaffected.  Unlike acx1-1 mutants, jasmonic acid accumulation was not reduced upon wounding of mutant plants when compared to the wild type.
Little difference in chlorophyll content compared to wild-type.
Little effect of the1-3 on the kor1-1 phenotype.
little reduction in the growth of the bacterial pathogen PstDC3000
Live <i>E. coli</i> O157:H7 bacteria were able to induce stomatal closure in mutant epidermal peels.
lmi1-1 enhances meristem identity defects, strong increase in number of secondary inflorescences and bracts compared with lfy-10/+.
loi1-1 mutants are less sensitive to inhibitors of the MEP and MVA pathways of isoprenoid biosynthesis than wild type plants. Lovastatin (an inhibitor of HMG CoA reductase and the MVA pathway), normally inhibits root, growth alters root tip morphology, halts lateral root development, causes cotyledon contraction, and arrests true leaf development. But, all of these phenotypes are less prominent in loi1-1 mutants treated with lovastatin. Sterol levels are reduced less in loi1-1 mutants than in wild-type plants following treatment with lovastatin. HMG1 and HMG2 transcript levels are not altered in loi1-1 mutants, however, there is increased HMG CoA reductase activity in loi1-1 mutants compared to wild type when the plants are treated with lovastatin. Clomazone (an inhibitor of DXS and the MEP pathway) normally causes albinoism and defects in thylakoid development in wild type plants, but loi1-1 mutants treated with the same concentration of clomazone can develop green leaves and normal chloroplasts. The transcript and protein levels for DXS are the same for wild-type and loi1-1 mutants.
loi1-2 mutants are less sensitive to inhibitors (lovastatin and clomazone) of the MEP and MVA pathways of isoprenoid biosynthesis than wild type plants.
Longer carpels than those of the ga1-3 single mutant.
Longer hypocotyl compared to wild-type when grown in medium- and low-light.
Longer primary roots and increased number of lateral roots as compared to WT. Increased levels of PIN1 and PIN2 proteins on the plasma membrane.
Longer root hairs than wild-type but no other obvious visible phenotypes.
Longer roots when plants are grown under salt stress (50-100nM NaCl).
Longer roots when plants are grown under salt stress (50-100 nM NaCl).
longer root than the wild type; significant increase in cortex cell number indicating enlargement of the meristem.
Longest delay in flowering (among all fpa mutants). Rosette leaf number at flowering was approximately 5 times higher than in the wild type.
Long hypocotyl.  Plants flower early in short- and long-day conditions.  Arrhythmic CAB2:LUC (reporter gene) expression and leaf movement in constant light, monochromatic red or blue light.
Long hypocotyl.  Plants flower early in short- and long-day conditions.  Arrhythmic CAB2:LUC (reporter gene) expression and leaf movement in constant light, monochromatic red or blue light.  Arrhythmic CCR2::LUC (reporter gene) expression in constant dark and constant light.
Long hypocotyl and elongated primary roots when germinated and grown on MS with sirtinol in darkness.  Auxin resistant in both light and dark.  Roots are less sensitive to the ethylene precursor ACC than wt roots.
Long hypocotyl phenotypes under white light.
Long hypocotyls. Leaves with lighter green color. Increased stem elongation. Early flowering. Parthenocarpy. Partial male sterility.
Long hypocotyl seedlings.   Arrhythmic CAB2::LUC (reporter gene) expression under constant light.
Long hypocotyls under low fluence white light.
long-hypocotyl under red, far-red, and blue light conditions. Mutantion affects pigment accumulation and CHLOROPHYLL a/b BINDING PROTEIN3 or CHALCONE SYNTHASE expression.  Promotes phyA degradation under far-red light.
Long petiole, pale green leaves and early flowering under white, blue and far-red light.
Long primary root when grown on low Pi.
Loss of cytosine methylation, reactivation of endogenous transposons
Loss of function alters the metabolic profile of chloroplast membrane lipids.
Loss-of-function mutations in SAL1 result in development- and size-independent drought tolerance: alx8 seedlings are more tolerant to PEG-6000-induced osmotic stress; leaf relative water content does not change after 12 d of drought; alx8 plants grown under drought conditions retain higher water potentials; alx8 plants remain viable 6 days longer than wild type after water withdrawal.  [Plant morphology, growth and development]: shorter and rounder leaves; more lobed edges; undulated surface and shorter petioles; changes to the internal structure of the leaf (disorganized vascular bundles, altered cell shape, less defined palisade structure, smaller chloroplasts and thicker leaves); delayed bolting and flowering. [Molecular phenotype]: 1414 genes significantly up-regulated and 1033 down-regulated more than two-fold in alx8 leaf tissue relative to their expression in Col-0 wild type; increased levels of the polyamine putrescine; decreased levels of fructose, galactose, glucose, cellobiose and a large number of unknown sugars and sugar derivatives; accumulation of unknown sugars and sugar derivatives; low levels of organic acids citrate, isocitrate, fumarate and malate; very low starch accumulation; lack of transitory starch granules in chloroplasts. [Stomatal morphology and dynamics]: no difference in stomatal morphology compared with the wild-type; small, but significant, decrease of stomatal index on the adaxial surface; similar stomatal aperture.
loss of Pseudomonas syringae effector AvrB perception
Loss of RPP2 resistance without effect on salicylic acid accumulation; increased susceptibility to virulent Pseudomonas syringae infection.
Low chlorophyll content. Chloroplast were smaller and accumulated fewer and smaller starch granules than wild-type. Under short-day conditions, the flowering  times of the mutant plants were significantly delayed. Premature cell death.
Lower biomass than WT. Delayed bolting. Reduced copper accumulation.
Lower chlorophyll levels than wild type.
Lower germination frequency and time, restored by addition of 1% sucrose. Smaller cotyledon rosettes and  shorter hypocotyls than wild-type and the root elongation  was also retarded. In the dark, root elongation was inhibited  on media lacking sucrose
Lower germination rates when grown on plates containing ABA and salt.
Lower growth rates under a 16-h day/8-h night photoregime when compared with wild type.
Low growth and flowering rates.
Low tocopherol (lt) line with an 80% reduction in total tocopherol content compared to wildtype.
lst8-1 mutants exhibit slower growth, high branching and abnormal development of flowers. Mutants show early senescence when shifted to long days and fail to accumulate raffinose. Mutants contain high levels of amino-acids and starch.
Lutien levels reduced by 30-70%.Increased shoot branching (2-3X more branches), early flowering and reduced fertility.
M2-6 mutant plants exhibited higher light sensitivity. M2-6 plants lost a larger fraction of Fv/Fm values with increasing light  intensities as compared with Columbia-1 wild-type plants. Furthermore, M2-6 plants grew much slower than wild-type plants. The mutant plants were variegated, containing large areas lacking chlorophyll.
Main stem length is mutants is significantly shorter than wt. Cells of the stem are shorter.
Male and female sterile.  Defects in meiosis beginning in metaphase I.  Hypersensitivity to a crosslinking reagent, cisplatin, and to gamma-irradiation.  Somatic homologous recombination is reduced twofold below wild-type frequency.
Male and female sterile. Male and female meiosis and/or early stages of gametophytic development are impaired. On the male side, the tetrad containing the four meiotic products seem to be normal initially, but before the release of the four microspores, nuclei appear to be fragmented. This phenotype is not fully penetrant. Approximately 5% of the released microspores are arrested at the binucleate stage, and 3% are arrested at the trinucleate stage, whereas the remaining microspores  have collapsed. A few microspores germinate  and form a pollen tube within the anther.  On the female side, ovule development started normally. However, at floral stage 12, when meiosis is completed in the wild type (Schneitz, 1995) and embryo sac development  has proceeded to the binucleate stage, the mutants still lack an embryo sac.
Male fertility is completely abolished in the mutant.
male gametophyte degenerates before pollen mitosis II
Male sterile.
Male sterile.Abnormal pollen wall development.
Male-sterile as a result of a failure of anther  dehiscence.
Male sterile due to a defect in meiosis II.
Male sterile due to defects in anther development. Earliest defect seen at developmental stage 6. Tapetal cells do not develop into secretory tapetal cells. Excessive tapetal cell division.Microspores also developmentally defective.
Male sterile due to defects in pollen tube growth. Reduced fertility/ seed set due to low fertilization rates, with seeds concentrated mostly at the stigma end. Silique guard cells are insensitive to exogenous ABA.
Male sterile mutant; anthers lack tapetal cells and have an increased number of microsporocytes. No tetrads were formed, and mature anthers in mutant flowers contained no pollen. The middle layer was thicker than in the wild type and remained abnormal; at the final stage of anther development became highly vacuolated.
Maltose levels are reported to be at least 40 times higher in mex1-2 mutants than in wild type plants.
Many cells contain multiple nuclei and nuclear anomalies.
Many flowers display a loss of fourth whorl determinancy.
Marked reduction in starch breakdown (48.3% compared to wildtype degradation). Even after 260h in extended night, the youngest leaves still stain darkly for starch with iodine solution.
Marked reduction in steady-state of oxygen evolution. 30% reduction in mutant plants grown under standard light conditions and over 50% reduction when grown under low light.
Mature dry seed obtained from homozygous mutant plants were slightly smaller and rounder in shape compared with wild-type seed. bige1a single mutant plants showed an increase in total number of rosette leaves at the time of flowering compared with the wild type. The bige1a mutant plants also flowered earlier than the wild type.
Mature dry seed obtained from homozygous mutant plants were slightly smaller and rounder in shape compared with wild-type seed. The bige1b-1 mutant displayed variability in leaf number and flowering time in independent experiments with a trend toward slight elevation of leaf number and early flowering.
Mature mutant plants are largely wildtype in phenotype apart for the morphology of the rosette leaves.
Mature xylem vessels were  deformed in the homozygous mutant. However, in contrast with irx1 mutants, these  mutants also exhibited deformations in initiating xylem cells (i.e. the protoxylem cells). In addition,  the irx8 mutants contain ~50% more xylem cells than wild-type stems at a comparable developmental stage.
mccb1-1 seeds have much higher levels of free branched-chain amino acids Ile, Leu and Val. mccb1-1 seeds also have higher Arg, His and Ser, and lower Gln and Glu.
mdr1-1 mutants show reduced basipetal auxin transport in light-grown and dark-grown seedling hypocotyls and in their inflorescences .
mdr1-2 mutants show reduced basipetal auxin transport in light-grown and dark-grown seedling hypocotyls and in their inflorescences.
mdr4-1 mutants display normal root architecture and have wild type rates of lateral root elongation.
mdr4-2 mutants display normal root architecture and have wild type rates of lateral root elongation.
Mechanical analysis of 4-d-old dark-grown hypocotyls shows significant reduction in the tensile strength of the mutant compared to wild type. In addition, the diameter of mutant hypocotyls is 10% greater than those of wild type.
Mechanical wounding largely restore trichome formation of gl1-2 in jasmonate signaling-dependent manner.
Meiocytes produce unreduced gametes by undergoing meiosis I but skipping meiosis II.
meiosis defective; normal vegetative growth but short siliques suggesting fertility defects.
Meiosis in pollen mother cells proceeds normally from early prophase I to the pachytene stage where full synapsis is observed, in the mutants. However, a reduced number of chiasmatas are detected in the mutants during chromosome condensation in late diplotene/diakinesis.Univalent chromosomes present at metaphase I cause mis-segregation at meiosis I and therefore, aneuploid tetrads are observed following meiosis II. There is no evidence of chromosome fragmentation in these mutants, suggesting that RPA1a is not required per se for the repair of double strand breaks during meiosis.
Meristem defect intermediate between that of ap1 and ap1 cal mutants. Inflorescences appear caulifower-like early after bolting but soon start producing ap1-like flowers on their periphery.
mes17-1 mutant roots are less responsive to MeIAA than wild type roots, but they show a normal root growth inhibition in response to IAA, and also grow like wild type roots under normal conditions. Light-grown mes17-1 mutants have hypocotyls that are 32% longer than wild-type hypocotyls when they are on soil, and 29% longer when they are on half strength MS media. In the dark, mes17-1 hypocotyls are the same length as wild type hypocotyls when both are grown on half-strength MS media. In other aspects of plant growth, mes17-1 mutants appear phenotypically normal, but they do have higher levels of DR5:GUS expression suggesting that they might have higher levels of auxin, auxin flow, or auxin signaling. mes17-1 mutants also appear to have a reduced ability to hydrolyze [14C]MeIAA compared to wild type plants in feeding assays.
mes17-2 mutant roots are less responsive to MeIAA than wild type roots, but they show a normal root growth inhibition in response to IAA, and also grow like wild type roots under normal conditions. Light-grown mes17-2 mutants have hypocotyls that are 29% longer when they are on half strength MS media. In the dark, mes17-2 hypocotyls are the same length as wild type hypocotyls when both are grown on half-strength MS media. In other aspects of plant growth mes17-2 mutants appear phenotypically normal.
Methylation pattern similar to that observed with the cmt3-7 mutant.
mex1-1 plants are smaller than wild type plants and have severely reduced chlorophyll levels. Maltose levels in the mutants are 40 times above levels found in wild type seedlings. Starch levels are higher in the mutant plants, and they have reduced rates of starch degradation and biosynthesis despite the similar levels of starch metabolic enzyme activity measured in the mutant plants.
microspore formation is defective; microtubule arrays displayed abnormalities during the meiosis-associated process of microspore formation.
microspore lethal
Microtubules in interphase and mitotic microtubule arrays appear less stable and are more sensitive to the microtubule destabilizer, oryzalin.  Buildup of microtubules in the preprophase band and decrease in microtubule lengths in spindles and phragmoplasts are all consistent with the presence of destabilized microtubules.
Minor deficiency in resistance to Psm ES4326 infection.
Mitochondria cluster near the cell center.
mmdh1-2 mmdh2-1 double mutants have no detectable mitochondrial malate dehydrogenase (MDH) activity and over a 40% reduction in total leaf MDH activity. They also have growth defects under long and short days.
Moderate changes of C7 and C8 glucosinolate species both in leaves and seeds.
Moderately hypersensitive to high Mn and hypersensitive to low Fe.
Modest rescue of the ebf1-3 ebf2-3 phenotype. Seedlings continue grow and develop at a slow pace after germination. Cotyledons partially expanded and turned pale green. Stunted root densely covered with root hair. Plants never flowered or set seeds.
Modification of amylopectine structure. Strong increase of number of small chain (degree of polymerisation between 5 and 9) and decrease in number of longer chains (11-17 degree of polymerisation).
Modification of amylopectin structure.
Molecules produced during oxidative stress (MDA) accumulate in vte1 npq1 leaves after 7 d in high light, confirming the occurrence of lipid peroxidation. Also, fatty acids and chlorophylls levels decrease in npq1 vte1 leaves.
molybdate concentrations in shoot and root were reduced to 10% and 20%, respectively, of that in the wild type. Shoot and root growth under Mo-limiting condition was reduced to 35% and 70%, respectively.
molybdate concentrations in shoot and root were reduced to 20% and 25%, respectively, of that in the wild type. Shoot and root growth under Mo-limiting condition was reduced to 80% and 75%, respectively.
mon1/cob-6 showed restored seedling root growth on 1/2 MS plates compared with cob-6 single mutant.
More branched trichomes compared with the wild type.
More dramatic rescue of the ebf1-3 ebf2-3 phenotype. Seedlings grow rapidly after germination and eventually developed large rosette of true leaves. However the leaves are epinastic with elongated petioles and small leaf blades. Produced fertile but shorter flowers and viable seeds.
More resistant to drought stress than wild type. Reduced levels of ABA-glucose ester with respect to wild type. Expression of ABA-responsive genes is upregulated with respect to wild type.
More sensitive to drought stress than wildtype (tested after a 15-day lack of water supply).
More severe phenotype than each of the single mutants, leaf mesophyll cells contained only one or two chloroplasts, usually constricted.
More severe phenotype that hemizygote. Enlarged meristems, fasciated stems, reduced size/filamentous gynoecium, curled and radialized leaves.
More susceptible to Agobacterium tumefaciens.
More than 80% of the mutants could grow in the presence of 500nM of the PPOX inhibitor, acifluorfen, while 50% and 100% of wildtype seedlings failed to grown on plates containing 50 and 100nM, respectively.
More variegated than ftsh2.
morphological alterations in flowers or in siliques was observed when plants were grown in excess Fe. Mutants had no altered sensitivity with respect to wt in response to salinity, osmotic stress, cold stress, nor oxidative stress.
Morphologically normal but slightly smaller than wild-type.
Morphologically similar to double mutant wag1-1/wag2-1. When seedlings were grown on vertical plates, root exhibited pronounced wavy pattern. Gravitropism was not affected in mutant plants. Double mutant plants were more resistant to inhibition of root curling by auxin transport inhibitor NPA than wild type plants.
Morphologically similar to wild type. When seedlings were grown on vertical plates, root exhibited pronounced wavy pattern.
Morphologically similar to wild type. When seedlings were grown on vertical plates, root exhibited slight wavy pattern. Overall phenotype identical to wag1-1 mutant allele.
Morphologically similar to wild type. When seedlings were grown on vertical plates, root exhibited wavy pattern.
Morphologically WT.  Quantitative nonphotochemical quenching (NPQ)measurements showed that the npq6 mutant exhibits less NPQ than WT. the biggest differences were seen in the induction phase of NPQ.   The npq mutant has WT levels of teh maximum quantum yield of PSII, chlorophylla+b contents and the xanthophyll cycle pigment pool size.
Morphology and development of mutant plants grown in soil or in standard culture conditions was unaltered. When grown under iron deficiency, mutant plants were comparable to wild type control. The same was observed when plants were grown under zinc, copper and manganese deficiency. The metal content (measured by ICP-MS) was indistinguishable from those present in the wild type plants.
Most double mutant plants have no branch points (about 37% have one branch point).
most extreme allele; resemble wild-type plants that have been repeatedly treated with G.A.; erect rosette leaves, light green color, early flowering and parthenocarpy; stem elongation is increased caused primarily by an increase in internode length; early stem elongation is so rapid that flower buds occasionally remain wrapped in the yet unfolded cauline leaves resulting in bending of the main stem; partial male sterility (greatly reduced when plants grown at 18C); altered gibberellin signal transduction, resistant to the gibberellin (G.A.) biosynthesis inhibitor paclobutrazol; long hypocotyl due to HY2 allele.
Most homozygous embryos abort. Some can be recovered by germination on MS media. Those seedlings have short roots, never develop true leaves and die shortly after germination.
Most mutant embryos were arrested at transition or heart stage, with few reaching torpedo stage. Mutant seeds were desiccation intolerant and germinated poorly even when cultured on agar plates.
Most of the flowers from gik homozygous mutants appeared normal without any  gametophytic defects, but a small number of  flowers (22 of 800) showed various degrees of defects in stamen and carpel development.Stamen  development was impaired, which resulted in delayed dehiscence or indehiscence of anthers. In some cases, the filaments  of the stamens were branched and had ectopic anther formation,and anthers were partially transformed into petal-like structures
Most of the male gametophyte degenerates before pollen mitosis II.  Homozygous plants are dwarf.
Most trichomes do not develop any branch points.
Much greater leaf development in both vcs-1  and tdt MC4 when grown at 16?C, whereas growth at 22 and 29?C resulted in progressively more severe defects in leaf development. However, tdt MC4 showed less extensive leaf development than that shown by vcs-1. Although some details of the vcs and tdt phenotypes differed, the major phenotypic defects were similar.
Much reduced fertility compared to wild type Ler.
Multiple straight hairs
Mutant able to germinate and develop green cotyledons under inhibitory concentrations of NaCl.
mutant accumulated 2.5 times more sulfate than the wild type
Mutant accumulates lower levels of melatonin and less anthocyanin than the wild type.
Mutant belonging to the strong class. Milder phenotypes than that observed in the mutants of the lethal class. Not adult lethal although mutation causes a severe size reduction of light-grown mature plants and greatly reduce seed set. Dark-grown seedlings  homozygous for the mutation exhibit light-grown characteristics, including  patterns of cell differentiation and gene expression.
Mutant belonging to the weak class. Milder phenotypes than that observed in the mutants of the strong class. Not adult lethal although mutation causes a severe size reduction of light-grown mature plants and greatly reduce seed set. Dark-grown seedlings  homozygous for the mutation exhibit light-grown characteristics, including  patterns of cell differentiation and gene expression.
Mutant calluses exhibit premature signs of senescence (browning within 3 weeks).
Mutant carpels showed significantly fewer pollen tubes and pollination events, particularly in the basal half of the gynoecium.
Mutant display a red-fluorescence phenotype in primary leaves and hyper-fluorescent trichome phenotype in secondary leaves.
Mutant displays a loss of RPP5 resistance.
Mutant displays altered photosynthetic characteristics: in a gas regime of 355 &mu;l.l<sup>-1</sup> CO<sub>2</sub>, 2% O<sub>2</sub> and balance N<sub>2</sub>, the mutant assimilates CO<sub>2</sub> for extended periods at a rate about equal to that of the wild type. In an atmosphere containing 21% O<sub>2</sub>, the photosynthesis rate of the mutant initially approached the wild-type rate but then rapidly declined to zero. This reduction was completely reversed by a 15-20 min dark treatment imposed at the time of 50-70% inhibition.
Mutant displays a variable phenotype when  grown in the light, ranging from an almost normal morphology (with protuberances barely visible and restricted to cotyledons or hypocotyls) to a strongly perturbed development in which cells detached from all aerial organs.
Mutant displays resistance to <i>Pst</i> DC3000 and is insensitive to coronatine and methyl jasmonate.
Mutant does not show arsenic tolerance compared with WT controls.
Mutant embryos exhibit wildtype-like staining patterns for most of the activities analysed: 6PGDH, GK, PGM, PGI and ADH. But slight increase in G6DPH staining at 12 days after fertilization.
Mutant embryos exhibit wildtype-like staining patterns for most of the activities analysed: G6PDH, 6PGDH, GK, PGM, PGI and ADH.
Mutant exhibited reduced leaf growth (~20%), shorter hypocotyls in the dark, and partial BL insensitivity in root-growth assays.
Mutant flowers also show a reduction in the overall number of second-whorl organs. In addition, fewer filaments and staminoid organs were present in the double mutant compared with rbe-3 single mutants. Reduced stamen number in the third whorl of ant-4 mutants was partially rescued by rbe-3.
Mutant flowers are glabrous.
Mutant flowers do not have carpels and are indeterminate.
Mutant flowers have carpelloid sepals and sepal like organs topped with horns. No petals and stames are absent or fused to first whorl organs. Sterile.
Mutant flowers sometimes produce more than four sepals and exhibit fusion between adjacent sepals. More than four sepals were observed in approximately 7% of rbe-3 flowers, while some degree of sepal fusion was observed in 35% of flowers (corresponding to 10% of all sepals). In rbe-3 flowers with more than four sepals, the extra sepal was thinner than the remaining four sepals. In some cases, one of the adjacent sepals was  also somewhat reduced in width. Sepal fusion can occur in the absence of more than four sepals. Sepal fusion was observed most often at the base of these organs and more rarely along their entire length. We measured the width of mature sepals to determine whether  sepal fusion might be due to wider organs. rbe-3 sepals were 12% wider than Landsberg erecta (Ler) sepals at maturity.
Mutant grown axenically in the presence of 10 mM L-fucose contain WT amounts of fucose in both root- and leaf-derived cell wall material.
Mutant grown in greenhouse or growth chamber exhibits reduced shoot and root biomass relative to the wild-type.
Mutant grown on Pi-deficient medium for 25 days accumulate more anthocyanins than wild-type.
Mutant growth was defective compared with  that of wild type. The mutants were reduced in size and had pale-green laminas with an  irregular blade surface and thinner inflorescence stems, but root growth was not  visibly reduced. Furthermore, the fresh weight of mutant was approximately half of that of wild type.
Mutant had fewer rosette leaves compared to WT plants at the same age. Moreover, mutant rosette leaves were smaller and more round and had shorter petioles than WT.
Mutant has a normal level of RUB-CUL1 that is in keeping with the lack of any growth defect in these plants.
Mutant has a slightly shorter hypocotyl.
Mutant has multiple changes to its leaf ionome, including elevated concentrations of sodium, magnesium, and zinc and decreased calcium, manganese, and iron. Other phenotypes include: decreased expression of genes known to be involved in Casparian strip development, including CASP1, PER64, and ESB1, defective Casparian strips and an enhanced leakage of propidium iodide into the stele.
Mutant homozygous mea embryo  sacs accumulated 45 times more maternal transcripts  than wild-type before fertilization,  and it persisted after fertilization (7.5 times more transcripts  4 d after pollination.
Mutant hypocotyls are more resistant to IAA treatment (inhibition of growth) than wildtype.
Mutant hypocotyls are more sensitive to IAA treatment (inhibition of growth) than those of wildtype.
Mutant hypocotyls were 75% of the length of WT hypocotyls when grown under long-day conditions, which corresponded to a reduction in hypocotyl cell length but not cell number. However, hypocotyl length was not compromised when mutant seedlings were grown in the dark.
Mutant is able to survive on 1 mM arsenate.
Mutant is almost fully resistant to the virulent powdery mildew <i>Golovinomyces orontii</i>.
Mutant is completely devoid of all  four forms of tocopherol.
mutant is defective in the hydrolysis of phospholipids and has a reduced capacity to accumulate galactolipids under limiting Pi conditions. Morphological analysis of the pldz2 root system shows a premature change in root architecture in response to Pi starvation.
Mutant is extremely chlorotic and grows considerably more slowly than wild type (particularly on soil).
Mutant is resistant to FR-induced block of  greening.
Mutant is unaffected by fosmidomycin treatment.
Mutant kasI plants have multiple morphological defects, including chlorotic (in netted patches) and curly leaves, reduced fertility, and semidwarfism. There are only one to five enlarged chloroplasts in the mesophyll cells of chlorotic sectors of young kasI rosette leaves, indicating suppressed chloroplast division under KASI deficiency. KASI deficiency results in a significant change in the polar lipid composition, disrupted embryo development before the globular stage and dramatically reduces FA levels (~33.6% of the wild type) in seeds.
Mutant keule embryos have large multinucleate cells with gapped or incomplete cross walls, as well as cell wall stubs that are very similar to those observed upon caffeine inhibition of cytokinesis in plants. Slower cell division.  The planes of cell division are often misoriented. keule mutants die as seedlings with large polyploid cells.
Mutant lacked xanthine dehydrogenase and ROS-generating activities but contained normal levels of aldehyde oxidase activity. AtXDH1 transcript level in leaves of the Atxdh1 insertion line was threefold lower than in wild type.
Mutant leaf petioles displayed clusters of densely cytoplasmic, undifferentiated cells on the adaxial side, coincident with the development of ectopic outgrowths.
Mutant leaves are misshapen and display ectopic outgrowths along the petiole and the base of the blade.
Mutant leaves display premature senescence four weeks after germination and are fully senesced after six weeks.
Mutant leaves were small and irregular in shape compared with the wild type. Both surfaces of mutant leaves differed from the wild type. Adaxial surfaces of the wild type showed the characteristic jigsaw puzzle shape of pavement cells. In the mutant, the cells contained fewer, larger lobes. Epidermal cells on the abaxial surface of mutants were collapsed. This collapsed appearance was consistently seen in views of the abaxial leaf surface of mutant plants but was never observed on the abaxial surface of wild-type leaves or on the adaxial surfaces of either the wild-type or mutant plants.
Mutant leaves were stained with NBT or DAB: the results indicated an increased level of H2O2 but little difference in O2- . This difference in H2O2 was further investigated by quantitative determination of seedling H2O2 using an Amplex Red assay. Light grown ggt1-1 seedlings, but not dark grown seedlings, had increased levels of H2O2 relative to wild-type.
Mutant lines did not display a detectable signal with JIM84 (a monoclonal antibody specifically binding to Lea structures on plant N-glycans), whereas, in wild-type plants, a strong staining was visible.
Mutant  lines showed identical asynaptic and chiasma frequency  phenotypes.
Mutant mdr1-1 seedlings show an 80% reduction in acropetal auxin transport, but have normal levels of basipetal transport in their primary roots. Although gravitropism occurs normally in these mutants, they have a pronounced increase in root waviness resulting in a threefold increase in absolute curvature  relative to wild type seedlings.
Mutant mdr1-2 seedlings show an 80% reduction in acropetal auxin transport, but have normal levels of basipetal transport in their primary roots. Although gravitropism occurs normally in these mutants, they have a pronounced increase in root waviness resulting in a threefold increase in absolute curvature  relative to wild type seedlings.
Mutant meristems develop abnormally.The meristem is enlarged shortly after germination and appears disorganized. Primordia are irregular and lateral organs produced include tubular and finger-like structures. Also affects the development of roots. Primary root growth is inhibited. The root apical meristems are enlarged and lack distinct columella cells or starch granules.
Mutant plant Does Not show the post illumination increase in Chl fluorescence due to the loss of NDH-mediated reduction of the plastoquinone pool in darkness (PMID: 20430763, 20666928).
mutant plants accumulate a higher amount of nitrate in older leaves; defective in remobilizing nitrate from older leaves to younger leaves.
Mutant plants accumulate ubiquitin fusion degradation test substrates as opposed to degrading them, as wild type plants do.
Mutant plants appeared  to grow and develop normally. Their seeds  phenotype have paler seed coat colour compared  to wild-type Ws but the embryo was the same colour as WT.
Mutant plants appeared very similar to wild-type plants at both seedling and adult stages. Root growth was inhibited to almost the same extent in both wild-type and mutant seedlings in response to exogenous auxin. In addition, the lbd16-1 mutation did not affect auxin-regulated gene expression, because auxin-induced IAA5, IAA19, LBD29, and LBD33 to a similar degree in mutant and wild-type seedlings.
Mutant plants are indistinguishable from WT, except for a delay in time to flowering measured as the number of days to bolting and the total leaf numbers at flowering. On average, the mutant plants flower 10 days and 44 days later than WT plants under long day and short day growth conditions, respectively.
Mutant plants are moderately dwarfed with all organs smaller than the wild type.  The ratio of leaf stomata to epidermal cells was high in the mutant, which also exhibited a delayed stomatal development compared with the wild type. Mutant plants were hypersensitive to DNA-damaging reagents including hydroxyurea, methylmethane sulfonate, and bleocin.
Mutant plants are more sensitive to salt stress at later stages of development and are killed by prolonged exposure to 100 mM NaCl or 200 mM mannitol, whereas wild type plants survive.
Mutant plants are much smaller in size than Col-0 wild type and they have serrated leaves that are yellow to light green in color. Homozygous mutants are sterile and must be propagated as heterozygotes.
Mutant plants are much smaller in size than Col-0 wild type and they have serrated leaves that are yellow to light green  in color. Homozygous mutants are sterile and must be propagated as heterozygotes.
Mutant plants are not more susceptible to donor-site photoinhibition.
Mutant plants are reduced in size and show a darker leaf coloration than the wild type.
Mutant plants contained chlorophyll amounts comparable to those of the wild-type controls.
Mutant plants develop  anthers that do not contain viable pollen and  only aberrant embryo sacs.
Mutant plants developed extensive ectopic blade outgrowths along the rosette leaf petiole, like those observed in homozygous bop1-1 plants.
Mutant plants displayed increased number of axillary branches, rounder rosette leaves, smaller rosette diameter, and reduced stature; this phenotype is similar to those of the other recessive axillary bud outgrowth max mutants of Arabidopsis.
Mutant plants displayed vegetative leaves of slightly reduced size and a bushy, extremely branched inflorescence. Also, extremely simple venation was observed in vegetative leaves and cotyledons, increased shoot branching, and reduced root waving and fertility. Mutant plants had reduced sensitivity to exogenous auxin, which otherwise displayed a wild-type response to auxin transport inhibitors.
Mutant plants display several prominent aerial and root phenotypes. Flowering time under long-day conditions (16 h light) was  delayed, in comparison with wild-type C24 plants, but mutant plants displayed no change in leaf number at the time of flowering, with an average of 22 rosette leaves. However, leaf size was reduced in the mutant, resulting in  decreased rosette growth and reduced fresh weight.
Mutant plants exhibit all known major  ABA defects (seed dormancy, stomatal opening, growth inhibition).
Mutant plants exhibit altered patterns of root and organ growth as a result of defective anisotropic cell expansion. Roots, etiolated hypocotyls, and leaf petioles exhibit right-handed axial twisting, and root growth on inclined agar media is strongly right skewed. Cortical microtubules reoriented. The touch-dependent helical growth of roots is suppressed by the antimicrotubule drugs propyzamide and oryzalin, and right skewing is exacerbated by cold treatment.
Mutant plants exhibit a severe reduction in fertility and markedly reduced size of the siliques. Mutant microspores fail to separate from tetrads and pollen grains are fragile with an abnormal morphology and altered cell wall structure. Consequently, pollen grain was mostly not released from open anthers, and those that were released, appeared as pollen tetrads. Pollen germination in vitro was very poor, compared to the wild type pollen. In addition, mutant plants suffer from imbalances in cation homeostasis.
Mutant plants exhibit defects in basal and R protein-mediated immunity and in systemic acquired resistance but do not display obvious pleiotropic defects in development, salt tolerance, or plant hormone responses.
Mutant plants exhibited collapse when 24-48 h passed between acclimation at 37 degrees C and exposure to 45 degrees C
Mutant plants exhibited dramatically enhanced susceptibility to fungal pathogen Botrytis cinerea, both in terms of severity of lesions and rate of spread.
Mutant plants exhibited earlier flowering and shorter vegetative and reproductive phases, producing more branched roots and inflorescences compared to wild-type plants. Senescence occurred earlier in mutants than the wild-type plants.
Mutant plants exhibited higher percentageof pollen germination than the WT under cold stress condition.
Mutant plants exhibit over two-fold higher PSII excitation pressure compared to wildtype plants.
mutant plants exhibit severely attenuated chloroplast movements under all tested fluence rates of light. Leaf cross sections revealed that regardless of the light condition, chloroplasts are more evenly distributed in leaf mesophyll cells in mutants than in the wild type.
Mutant plants exposed to pulses of FR continue to display negative gravitropism and so displayed a characteristic U-shaped hypocotyl phenotype. When exposed to continuous R at a photon irradiance of 5 lmol m)2 sec)1, the hypocotyls of the gil1-1 mutant remained predominantly negatively gravitropic.
Mutant plants exposed to pulses of FR continue to display negative gravitropism and so displayed a characteristic U-shaped hypocotyl phenotype. When exposed to continuous R at a photon irradiance of 5 lmol m)2 sec)1, the hypocotyls of the gil1-1 mutant remained predominantly negatively gravitropic.
Mutant plants fail to quench the fluorescence efficiently upon illumination, indicating that the limiting step of the linear electron transport lies behind PSII.
Mutant plants flowered slightly later than wild type and had a reduced sensitivity of the inhibition of hypocotyl growth in far-red light
Mutant plants generally produced fertile flowers and displayed relatively weak fusions in inflorescences.
Mutant plants grown on vertical plates had fewer lateral roots were developed than wild type or either single mutant, despite having similar primary root lengths to wild type. Significant decrease in number of lateral root primordia was found in double mutant roots, with no differences in later stages of lateral root development.
Mutant plants had a pale green color and grew more slowly than wild-type.
Mutant plants had binucleate mature pollen grains, contrary to tricellular pollen in the wild type, due to failure to undergo cytokinesis at pollen mitosis. Binucleate mutant pollen contained two free nuclei and remained uncellularized. Mature mutant embryo sacs showed various numbers (2 to 5) of nuclei located toward the micropylar pole without visible cellular boundaries. After fertilization, mutant embryo sacs did not develop further and remained uncellularized. At early bicellular pollen stage, approximately 1/2 of dividing microspores had incomplete callose walls, which were correctly positioned at the generative cell pole but do not persist and are degraded before mid-bicellular pollen stage. Subsequently, at mid-bicellular pollen stage, when the generative cell nucleus is highly condensed in wild-type, in approximately 1/2 of mutant pollen, the smaller generative pole nucleus remains round and relatively uncondensed and does not divide further.
Mutant plants had binucleate mature pollen grains, contrary to tricellular pollen in the wild type, due to failure to undergo cytokinesis at pollen mitosis. Binucleate mutant pollen contained two free nuclei and remained uncellularized. Mature mutant embryo sacs showed various numbers (2 to 5) of nuclei located toward the micropylar pole without visible cellular boundaries. After fertilization, mutant embryo sacs did not develop further and remained uncellularized. At early bicellular pollen stage, approximately 1/3 of dividing microspores had incomplete callose walls, which were correctly positioned at the generative cell pole but do not persist and are degraded before mid-bicellular pollen stage. Subsequently, at mid-bicellular pollen stage, when the generative cell nucleus is highly condensed in wild-type, in approximately 1/3 of mutant pollen, the smaller generative pole nucleus remains round and relatively uncondensed and does not divide further.
Mutant plants had defects in both embryo and seedling development. Mutant seeds accumulate anthocyanin, are intolerant to desiccation, cotyledons did not curl, and had often fused along one side of their margins. Trichomes were formed on the cotyledons during embryogenesis, and the accumulation of storage proteins and lipids were reduced. Tan mutants die as embryos, but immature mutant seeds can be germinated in culture. However, tan mutant seedlings are defective in shoot and root development with stunted roots and hypocotyls that fail to elongate in the dark. True leaves rarely emerged and plants die at seedling stage.
Mutant plants had increased ABA content in response to both, low water potential and exogenous ABA. Also, accumulation of proline was reduced 4-5 fold in mutant plants compared to WT, in response to low water potential, and exogenously applied  ABA.
Mutant plants had increased Proline acummulation at low water potential, but had reduced response to exogenous ABA.
Mutant plants had larger leaf and cotyledon laminae, and leaves had a dome-shaped, positive Gaussian curvature, in contrast to flat WT leaves. Mutant siliques were shorter, flattened, and wider at the top and had undulations in the seedpod walls, compared with the smooth, narrow, cylindrical shape of WT siliques. Branching of trichomes on mutant leaves was reduced, to two rather than the three to four branches of WT. The larger lamina area observed in the leaves and cotyledons of mutant plants was due to increases in both length and width. For cotyledons, this increase in growth occurred without affecting shape or flatness. However, mature leaves in mutant plants were more oval in shape because of an altered lamina length-to-width ratio and could not be flattened without introducing cuts in the margin because of their positive curvature.
Mutant plants had no observable defect in growth or development under standard laboratory conditions and no change in auxin sensitivity was observed in a standard root-elongation assay.
Mutant plants had normal vegetative development, but flowers failed to produce pollen and seeds; no viable pollen was found in the anthers. In developing pollen mother cells, meiotic progression was interrupted at anaphase I, where chromosomes are randomly distributed and some appear fragmented. Normal embryo sac development was disrupted too, compared to the wild type. AtRAD51 gene was accumulated in the inflorescence nuclei of homozygous plants, while it was absent in the inflorescence nuclei in wild type plants. After exposure to gamma-rays, the levels of AtRAD51 was unchanged in the inflorescence nuclei in mutant plants, while in the wild type nuclei AtRAD51 expression was strongly induced. Compared to the wild type, mutant seedlings were hypersensitive to gamma-irradiation, had shorter roots and fewer leaves.
Mutant plants had pale-green cotyledons and leaves.
Mutant plants had smaller fruit and a modest reduction in fertility compared with wild type (59% of wild-type seed set). Reciprocal crosses revealed the fertility defect to be female-specific.
Mutant plants had very small siliques, showing very low fertility. The the anther locules turned brown upon maturity and released fewer pollen grains than wildtype plants.
Mutant plants have altered shape of chloroplasts. Plastids somewhat larger (~20%) and more spherical in appearance compared to that of wild-type plants of the same stage and in the same tissue. The grana stacks in mesophyll cells of mutant plants are less appressed than in the wild-type chloroplasts whereas the structure of the stacks is not affected.
Mutant plants have a weak phenotype, displaying a single ectopic leaf outgrowth and mild leaf lobing in a proportion similar to that in bop1-3 plants.
Mutant plants have dramatically reduced growth habit, defects in vascular formation and reduced cell-cell adhesion properties in hypocotyl and cotyledon tissues. Secondary growth is enhanced in epc1 hypocotyl tissues. When germinated on MS agar plates, cotyledon and leaf expansion, primary root elongation and hypocotyl elongation of the mutant seedlings were reduced compared with the wild type. Epidermal cells of hypocotyls and roots exhibited a left-handed spiraled organization which was not present in the wild type. Cotyledons of epc1 were curled at the edges, thicker and more fragile than the wild type. Vascular patterning was disrupted in the epc1 mutants. Callose deposition in the vasculature of epc1 cotyledons was reduced compared to the wild type and the majority of seedlings showed no vascular-specific deposition. However, the majority of epc1 seedlings showed ectopic callose deposition seen as extensive punctate distribution of fluorescent signal throughout the cotyledons, leaves, hypocotyl and root tissues.
Mutant plants have longer hypocotyls in red  light and in short days. Unlike constans, the col3 mutant flowers early and shows a reduced number of lateral branches in  short days. The mutant also exhibits reduced formation of lateral roots. The col3 mutation partially suppresses the cop1 and  deetiolated1 (det1) mutations in the dark
Mutant plants have residual root meristem activity (weak allele). The root length in mutants was less than half of the root length in the wild-type (Col-0).
Mutant plants inoculated with Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato are not different than inoculated wildtype
Mutant plants reached a lower height and had an increased number of shoots, relative to wild type, implying that apical dominance was reduced; delayed senescence, irregular leaf shapes and lower fertility compared with wild-type plants were also noted.
Mutant plants show altered  leaf anatomy and ultrastructure.
Mutant plants showed alterations in the cuticular wax profiles and embryo development. Compared to wild type, the wax on inflorescence stems in mutants is reduced nearly 60% in total amount, has a proportional reduction in aldehydes and aldehyde metabolites, and has a proportional increase in acids, primary alcohols, and esters. Also, the C29 alkanes in mutants are nearly 6-fold lower, and the C30 primary alcohols are 4-fold higher compared to the wild type. In contrast to stems, the wax on mutant leaves increased roughly 43% in amount relative to the wild type, with the major increase occurring in the C31 and C33 alkanes. Approximately 70% of mutant seeds are shrunken and nonviable, with these being randomly distributed within both inflorescence and silique. Viable mutant seeds are slightly larger than those of wild type; the proportions of these fatty acids are not significantly different from wild type. Shrunken seeds contain 34% of the fatty acids of wild-type seeds, with proportionally more palmitic, stearic, and oleic acids, and less of the longer and more desaturated homologs. Histological analysis of aborted rst1 seeds revealed that embryo development terminates at the approximate heart-shaped stage, whereas viable rst1 and wild-type embryos develop similarly.
Mutant plants showed alterations in the cuticular wax profiles and embryo development. Similar to rst1-1.
Mutant plants showed decreased  sensitivity to ABA during root tip growth. Seed germination and seedling growth were less  sensitive to ABA in the perk4 mutants than in wild types.
Mutant plants showed irregularities in trichome branch positioning and expansion
Mutant plants showed irregularities in trichome branch positioning and expansion.
Mutant plants showed irregularities in trichome branch positioning and expansion. Disruption of actin and microtubule cytoskeleton organization was observed.
Mutant plants showed the post illumination increase in Chl fluorescence due to the loss of NDH-mediated reduction of the plastoquinone pool in darkness.
Mutant plants showed the post illumination  increase in Chl fluorescence due to the loss of NDH-mediated reduction of the plastoquinone pool in darkness.
Mutant plants show increased lipid peroxidation and more damage upon photooxidative stress induced by drought, high light or paraquat.
Mutant plants show low level expression of a truncated RNA. Mutants are supersensitive to the toxic TRP analog 5MT and plants have reduced levels of indole glucosinolates. No obvious morphological phenotype detected.
Mutant plants were, in average, larger than the WT.
Mutant plants were moderately sensitive to UV-B irradiation than the wild type when mutant seedlings were irradiated with various doses of UV-B irradiation and grown in the light. Aerial tissue growth was inhibited by long-term UV-B irradiation.
Mutant plants were moderately sensitive to UV-B irradiation than the wild type when mutant seedlings were irradiated with various doses of UV-B irradiation and grown in the light. Both root and aerial tissue growth were inhibited by UV-B irradiation.
Mutant plants were smaller, with pale green laminas and irregular blade surface, and their inflorescence stems were thinner than those of the Col stems.
Mutant pollen shows normal karyokinesis and is defective in a late developmental stage.  Callose accumulates ecotopically in mutant pollen grains.
Mutant produced a large proportion of dead pollen grains compared to wild type.
Mutant produces fewer lateral roots compared with the wild type.
Mutant produces significantly reduced levels of anthocyanins and is not responsive to cytokinins at all.
Mutant root growth was already somewhat reduced compared to WT plants under normal growth conditions but was significantly less sensitive to inhibition by 25 mM trehalose. Root length was reduced only by 46% compared to 90% in WT plants (Fig. 1B). The  germination rates on trehalose were identical to those on medium without trehalose indicating that the smaller roots are not caused by delayed or deficient germination.
Mutant root meristems are larger than those of wild type already at 2 dpg, but they stopped growing after reaching a fixed number of cells at 5 dpg.
Mutant root meristems showed an increased number of meristematic cells already at two days after germination (dpg) and accumulated cells also after five dpg, vastly exceeding the fixed number of cells of wild-type meristems.
Mutant roots are defective in hydrotropism, and have slightly reduced phototropism and modified wavy growth response. Has normal gravitropism and root elongation.
Mutant roots were abnormal; primary and lateral roots were short, root hairs formed close to the root apex, and root defects were most severe when plants were grown at low temperature.
Mutant rosettes were slower to flower than wildtype plants (34.1 d versus 30.2 d under a 16-h photoperiod). Mutant plants produced smaller bolts, but flower morphology and fertility were normal, and siliques were similar in size to those on wild-type plants. The smaller bolts of the mutant yielded only 62 mg seed/plant compared with 177 mg seed/plant from wild-type controls. Harvested mutant seeds appeared smaller and darker than seeds from wild-type plants that had been grown alongside the mutants. Examination by light microscopy revealed that 50% of mutant seeds contained green embryos that could be distinguished through the testa. When the green and normal brown seeds from a mutant plant were germinated separately, the green seeds showed 79% germination compared with 100% germination for the brown seeds.
Mutants accumulate poly(ADP-ribose) and are hypersensitive to bleomycin. Loss of function of PARG1 leads to severe cell death after bleomycin treatment.Mutants also have increased levels of ATM, ATR and SOG1 when plants are treated with bleomycin.
mutants allow increased penetration  by inappropiate pathogens (eg barley powdery mildew Blumeria graminis f. sp hordei, Erysiphe pisi (tribe Erysipheae), and B. g. hordei (tribe Blumerieae)). pen3-1 mutants are resistant to E. cichoracearum and become chlorotic after E. cichoracearum infection.
Mutants also displayed elongated hypocotyls in continuous R but not in continuous FR.
Mutants are defecting in amylopectin biosynthesis. Reduced amounts of starch and abnormal amylopectin, phytoglycogens are produced.
Mutants are defective in mitochondrial C->U RNA editing.
mutants are hypersensitive to Zn(II)
Mutants are not lethal at the seedling stage, and, at a few DAG, the purple cotyledons turn light green before the production of true  leaves.
Mutants are resistant to fumonisin B1.  In the absence of FB1, the plants have elongated petioles and enhanced leaf margin serration.  Plants appear to undergo early vegetative phase change.
Mutants are virtually indistinguishable from wild-type plants at all developmental stages (germination, vegetative and reproductive).
Mutants are virtually indistinguishable  from wild-type siblings in the dark and in all light conditions, both at seedling and mature stages.
Mutants carrying a semidominant, conditional lethal mutation confer constitutive expression of the pathogenesis-related (PR) genes PR-1, PR-2, PR-5 and the defensin gene PDF1.2, display spontaneous lesion formation, elevated levels of salicylic acid (SA) and heightened resistance to Peronospora parasitica Emco5. It induces strong resistance to virulent  bacterial and oomycete pathogens in an EDS1-, PAD4-, and NDR1-dependent manner via cross-regulation.
Mutants develop rosettes with dark green and serrated leaves. Rosette size is intermediate between that of stronger alleles and  wild-type plants.
mutants did not grow on medium  containing 2.5 mM or 5 mM of L-glutamine as the sole nitrogen source.
mutants did not show any phenotype under in vitro culture and greenhouse growth conditions.
mutants did not show any phenotype under in vitro culture and greenhouse growth conditions.
Mutants display 66% seed abortion, with both brown shrunken seeds (late abortion) and small white desiccated seeds (early abortion).  Cellularization of endosperm is not observed.  Microtubule organization in endosperm in defective.
Mutants display a mild partial photomorphogenic phenotype in the dark and in blue light, characterized by shorter hypocotyls with respect to wildtype plants grown under the same conditions.
Mutants displayed a reduced growth rate. Plants have pale-green and lower overall chlorophyll content, and the chlorophyll a/b ratio  is slightly decreased.
Mutants display plieotropic effects on development. When grown in continuous light seedlings  produce lanceolate shaped leaves with fewer numbers of cells. In long days- the rosettes are comprised of clusters of abnormally shaped leaves. Floral morphology is normal but the anthers do not shed pollen. Embryogenesis is defective. Mutant embryos are delayed in development and have fewer cells.
Mutants displays defects in plant development and RNA-directed DNA methylation. Floral inflorescences of mutant plants are more closely packed than those of wild type. Mutant seedlings are pale and grow slowly. Short  internode distances and disturbed phyllotaxy.
Mutants display stunted growth, reduced plant height and small rosettes.  Their leaves are small and narrow with lobed blades and disrupted tissue organization.
Mutants does not convert violaxanthin to antheraxanthin and zeaxanthin during exposure to high light.
mutant seed germination is hypersensitive to mannitol. Mutants are sensitive to and produce more H2O2. ABA impaired stomatal closure in atgpx3-1 mutant plants.
Mutant seedlings can be rescued by the addition of exogenous sucrose in all conditions.
Mutant seedlings did not have a long-hypocotyl phenotype when grown under continuous white light with a fluence rate of 150 &#956;mol?m-2?s-1.
Mutant seedlings displayed a long hypocotyl phenotype under red, far-red, and blue light.
Mutant seedlings displayed elongated hypocotyls and reduced chlorophyll accumulation when grown in white light.
Mutant seedlings exhibit a significant shift (~6 h) in the phase of the circadian rhythm of hypocotyl elongation responses to low R/FR.
Mutant seedlings grow better and form darker green leaves in the presence of elevated levels of cytokinins in medium.
Mutant seedlings treated with 10&#956;M flg22 peptide (strong growth inhibitor) display shoot and root growth similar to that of wildtype Ler.
Mutant seedlings were 1 to 2 mm taller than wild-type seedlings at all fluence rates >0.1 &#956;mol?m-2.s-1 Rc, an effect that indicates reduced responsiveness to light of this wavelength.
Mutant seeds accumulated the precursors of 12S globulin and 2S albumin, and increased level of ER-localized chaperones. The size of protein storage vacuoles in the mutant seed cells is smaller. Mutant seed cells also have novel subcellular structures with a high electron-dense core.
Mutant seeds germinate and grow better than wild-type plants on plates containing norspermidine, spermidine, Li+ or Na+. Experiments in soil with adult plants also demonstrate tolerance to Li+ and Na+. This tolerance is reflected both in the total size and in the discoloration of the leaves of stressed plants.
Mutant seeds germinated irrespective of red or far-red light irradiation, while wild-type seeds (Col-0) germinated only when PHYB was activated by the red light pulse. However, treatment with paclobutrazol (inhibitor of GA biosynthesis) blocked germination of both pil5 mutant seeds and WT seeds, even under continuous white light irradiation.
Mutant seeds germinated more efficiently than wild-type seeds under normal growing conditions.  Young seedlings were larger than wild type.  Mutant seed germination was less sensitive to ABA inhibition than wild-type seeds at high concentrations of ABA.
Mutant seeds grown on medium supplemented with non-phosphorylated synthetic 1-deoxy-D-xylulose (DX) develop green leaves.
Mutant seeds have a 37% increase in total carotenoids relative to wild type, owing mainly to a greater than twofold and fourfold increase in violaxanthin and neoxanthin, respectively. The lutein levels in the mutant are increased to the greatest extent in absolute terms compared with other carotenoids.
Mutant seeds showed tolerance to both arsenate and arsenite.
Mutant seeds show  hypersensitivity to nicotinamide (inhibitor of seed germination).
Mutant seeds were desiccation intolerant, occasionally viviparous, lacked protein bodies, and accumulated anthocyanin at maturity. The vascular pattern of mutant cotyledons was intermediate between that of wild-type leaves and cotyledons. Stomata and differentiated vascular elements were occasionally observed in mutant cotyledons. Trichomes were initiated on mutant cotyledons during embryogenesis and became prominent when immature embryos were germinated in culture. The fus3 phenotype is similar to that described for lecl-1, however, trichomes on fus3 cotyledons were also not as prominent as those produced on lec1 cotyledons. They also have different pattern of anthocyanin accumulation. The fus3 hypocotyl was not altered in shape and as a result the embryo was usually curled at maturity. Also fus3 cotyledons were thinner and more elongate than lec1 cotyledons.
Mutant seeds were not desiccation tolerant (unlike lec1), instead, 50-80% were desiccation intolerant, those that survived and germinated had cotyledons with trichomes on the adaxial surface. Embryos had abnormal suspensors, and precociously activated shoot apical meristem.
Mutants express high levels of stomatal lineage cell markers TMM and ERL1.
Mutants failed to adapt to the conditions of nitrogen limitation and started senescence much earlier and more rapidly than did wild-type plants supplied with 3 mM nitrate: mutant plants supplied with 10 mM nitrate had a similar pattern of growth and development to wild type. When the nitrate concentration was reduced to 3 mM, the mutant plants started senescence in the fifth rosette leaf at 24 DAG, and after this point senescence progressed rapidly with all rosette leaves showing senescence symptoms at 26 DAG, and the whole rosette dying at 32 DAG. In contrast, wild-type plants displayed no senescence symptoms in the fifth rosette leaf until 32 DAG. In wild-type plants, the process of senescence proceeded slowly and gradually from the fifth to the youngest rosette leaves, and it took at least 2 weeks for all rosette leaves to show the senescence symptoms.
Mutants fail to after-ripen and show reduced protein oxidation.
Mutants flowered normally in long day conditions, but flowered slightly later than wild type in short day.
Mutants grow and reproduce normally, although they are somewhat late flowering.
Mutants grown in the presence of 100 mM NaCl display a dramatic short root phenotype and radial swelling of the root elongation zone.ABA at between 0.5 and 2 microM partially and at 5 microM fully suppresses the NaCl-induced phenotype and partially suppresses in the absence of NaCl. Roots are also short and more swollen in media containing 1% sucrose.
Mutants grown on agar plates have widely  spread lateral roots. Compared with that of wild-type plants, the direction of lateral root growth is nearly horizontal rather than downward, indicating alteration of the gravitropic response. The angles between the lateral roots and the orientation of gravity are larger than those of the wild type. In addition, secondary lateral roots grow and change their direction of elongation to the horizontal.
Mutants have abnormal bioluminescence (luciferase transgene) in response to cold, osmotic stress, or ABA treatment.
Mutants have abnormal root hairs that are stunted, bulging or may be branched. The orientation of microtubules is abnormal.
Mutants have light green leaves, altered Fv/Fm (photosynthetic electron transport) and decreased leaf 16:3 fatty acids.
Mutants have only a slightly stunted phenotype when grown in the absence of exogenous sugar in the light. The phenotype is more obvious in the dark where hypocotyl elongation is inhibited, and little root development takes place.
Mutants have reduced levels of amylose and reduced amounts of starch granule bound GBSS.
Mutants have reduced seed 18:1 delta nine fatty acids. An analogous change in  fatty acids is seen in the leaf, but it is more subtle than in seed.
Mutants have significantly less complex venation architecture compared to wild-type.
mutant showed ABA-hypersensitive regulation of seed germination and root growth; increased sensitivity to salt and osmotic stress during germination; increased sensitivity to glucose during germination; reduced leaf transpiration rate; increased ABA-induced stomatal closure; stomatal responses to 0.5 mM H2O2 and Ca2+ as WT; WT sensitivity to GA, NAA and ACC; mutant plants had decreased ABA content in response to drought and ozone; increased ACC production in response to ozone.
Mutant showed a similar sensitivity to 25 mM trehalose as wild type (inhibition of root growth).
Mutant showed no light dependence of arsenic  tolerance, whereas wild-type seedlings showed an increased arsenate tolerance when grown in the dark compared with WT seedlings grown in the light.
Mutant shows a significant decrease in petiole length and is highly branched. The axillary buds, which are typically delayed in growth in wild-type plants, grow out to produce leaves and inflorescences.  The mutant plants have smaller rosette diameters due to a decrease in the lengths of petioles and leaf blades compared with wild-type plants.
Mutants lack ER bodies.
Mutants possessed slightly, but significantly, longer hypocotyls than WT and phyB mutants. Significantly reduced inhibition of hypocotyl elongation was also evident at 1.4 and 3.4 &mu;mol m-2 sec-1. Unlike fhy1 null mutants, fhl-1 nulls do not display significantly decreased sensitivity to the phyA-dependent block of greening in white light after de-etiolation in high intensity FR.
Mutants produced cotyledons that expanded slowly and accumulated anthocyanins around their margins, hypocotyls that were short and slightly swollen, and root hairs that were short and swollen. These traits were similar to those we reported previously for vcs-1 grown at 29?C. The vcs-7 mutant also showed cotyledon vein pattern defects.
Mutants produced two radially symmetric organs in the place of leaves; these organs were typically devoid of vascular tissue and lacked trichomes. Prolonged 16?C growth did not result in additional organs being produced, indicating that shoot meristem (SAM) activity was also lost. Mutants grown at 22?C showed a similar, albeit less severe, phenotype. The first leaf pair was slightly larger and flatter than those of 16?C-grown mutants and contained some vascular tissue, and additional radial organs were produced by the SAM. Mutants grown at 29?C showed an even less-severe phenotype; these plants produced flattened, irregularly shaped leaves with slightly lobed margins and an abnormal vein pattern.
Mutants produce less than one petal per flower on average, although most basal flowers can have more.
Mutants produce stomata on the hypocotyl and also produce small groups of hypocotyl cells in an arrangement that resembles braided 'challah' bread.
Mutants resistant to sirtinol and auxin, but not to gibberellins or brassinolide. Displayed developmental phenotypes similar to those of axr1, namely, short petioles, downwardly curling leaves, short inflorescence, and reduced fertility.
Mutants show a reduction in fucose, xylose, arabinose and mannose, compared to wild type.
Mutants showed elevated expression of PPCK under Pi starvation. Under high levels of Pi, root hair formation is not suppressed in mutants and they contained significantly  more total Pi and more anthocyanin than the wild-type. DFR  expression in Pi-sufficient conditions was substantially increased  in the bhlh32 mutant.
Mutants showed longer hypocotyls and closed cotyledons when grown in the dark on a medium containing Brz. After 2-3 weeks in the light, mutants showed narrow, outward-curving leaves and total leaf expansion was suppressed. After 42 days at termination of flowering, there were 2- to 2.5- fold more inflorescences and branches than in wild type.
Mutants showed reduced endocytosis and little ROS production  upon exposure to salt stress. Bleaching became  visible in the mutant plants after 4?5 days and most plants  were dead after 7 days after mutants were transferred to plates  containing 150 mM NaCl.
Mutants showed reduced  fecundity as a result of inefficient pollination  rather than defects in the formation of gametes. Most stamens in msg2-1 flowers did not exceed the height of the pistil and  failed in pollinating.
Mutants show inefficient deetiolation, contain more cytosolic inclusions than wild type
mutants  typically arrest before the mid-torpedo stage
Mutation causes abnormal cell expansion of the root cortical cell. A shift in the orientation of expansion from longitudinal to radial direction was observed in the roots by confocal microscopy. Mutation was partially rescued by adding ethylene biosynthesis inhibitors. Arial part of the mutant plants had visible leaf phenotype, with short wide leaves (including cotyledons) and shorter and wider petioles, when compared to wild type.
mutation causes sensitivity to ozone and other abiotic stresses
Mutation does not transmit through the female gametophyte- can only be propagated through the pollen. Egg and central cells accumulate starch and lack normal ER network. Heterozygous plants are semi-sterile with ca.50% unfertilized ,shriveled ovules.
mutation enhances pathogen resistance
Mutation had dramatic effects on the morphology of adult plants. The rosette leaves of mutant plants were much smaller than wild-type leaves. The mutants bolted - l-2 weeks later, the early flowers were infertile, the root system was much  less extensive, and the inflorescence was much smaller than those of the wild type.  The gynoecium of the mutant elongated significantly earlier relative to the rest of the developing flower, often protruding  out of the unopened buds.
Mutation is lethal in the homozygous state.
Mutation of BIR6 affects splicing of intron 1 of mitochondrial nad7 transcript, leading to strongly reduced accumulation of fully processed nad7 transcript. This affects assembly of Complex I and results in moderate growth retardation.
Mutation of WRKY46 by T-DNA insertion leads to better root growth under Al stress, and lower root Al content compared with the wild type Col-0. The wrky46 mutant shows increased root malate secretion, which is consistent with the higher ALMT1 expression in the mutant.
Mutations nearly eliminate non-CpG methylation at a target promoter but do not affect rDNA or centromere methylation.
mwl1-1/mwl2-1 double homozygous mutants are smaller compared with WT.
Narrow leaf lamina phenotype.
Nearly 60% of trichomes are unbranched.
Necrotic leaf lesions in short day conditions at low light.  Light-induced accumulation of H(2)O(2) and constitutive expression of genes for copper/zinc superoxide dismutase 2 and ascorbate peroxidase 1.
Negative effects of the mutation on cell elongation are also detectable in pedicels, siliques and petioles of rosette leaves after transition to reproductive growth.
Neoxanthin was absent in the mutant genotype, while an increase in Violaxanthin content was recorded. aba4-1 leaf discs were clearly more sensitive to light stress than the wild type (90% of chlorophyll was bleached in aba4-1 versus 35% in the wild type) aba4-1 has a reduced steady state ABA content (45% of wild-type content)
Nine-day-old wild-type seedlings grown for 16 h perday on plates incorporated approximately 20% of the 14C-glucose into cellulose in the assay conditions used. This was reduced by half in the mutant.
Ninefold reduction in the growth of the bacterial pathogen PstDC3000. extensive chlorosis. more susceptible to the fungal pathogen B. cinerea than the double mutants.
Nitrate concentration in nrt1.8-1 xylem sap is significantly higher than in that from wild type Ws plants.  Cadmium sensitive.
Nitrite fails to induce stomatal closure in epidermal peels of the double mutant.
No aberrant adult phenotypes.
No aberrant phenotype when grown under normal conditions; except a slightly earlier flowering initiation.
No aberrant root phenotype and no resistance to paclobutrazol (1-100 &mu;M).
no abnormal phenotype was observed in homozygous plants when grown under standard conditions
No accumulation of ORA59 transcripts upon JA or ethephon treatment.  Increased susceptibility to B.cinera infection.
No accumulation of whole cell reactive oxygen intermediates (ROI) was observed in the majority of interacting sites.
No additive effect on flowering time.
No alteration of flowering induction timing.
No alteration of rate of leaf formation.
no apparent morphological phenotype; reduced susceptibility to BSCTV (Beet severe curly virus) in Arabidopsis and impaired BSCTV replication in plant cells; impaired callus formation.
No bolting.
No branching of trichomes.
No carples.  Extra stamens formed following a spiral phyllotaxy.  Indeterminate floral meristem.
No cell death symptoms or alterations in senescence behavior compared to wild type.
No cell division defects are found in the root.
No centromere repeat hypomethylation phenotype.
No change in effect of ABA inhibition of seed germination.
No change in pattern of DAB staining (H2O2 visualization) compared to wild-type.
No change in the chlorophyll a/b ratio and no change in the content of various xanthophylls compared to wild type. Moreover, there was no difference in the extent light-induced deepoxidation of the xanthophyll cycle pigments.
No circadian period defects in constant darkness, constant light, constant red light, constant blue light or a combination of constant red and blue light.
No clear differences in arsenic speciation (arsenate or arsenite) in the mutant compared to wild type.
No cytokinin-induced inhibition of adventitious root formation.
No defect in meristem organization.
No defect in root vasculature morphology.
No defects in internode development.
No defects in kinetochore assembly are detected in this mutant, but it does grow more slowly than wild type plants at elevated temperatures (25-30 degrees C).
No defects were observed in the dehiscence of as1-1 siliques.
No delay in flowering but reduction in vernalization response.
No described phenotype. This line was used to assess the formation of the NDH complex by introducing into this double mutant a transgenic copy of the wild-type CRR7 gene.
No detectable changes in the cellular pools of COP9 signalosome complex subunits.
No detectable differences from wild type in  growth, development or seed set.
No difference in ABA levels compared to wild type.
No difference in chlorophyll content compared to wild-type.
No difference in germination, number of leaf or siliques per plant, seed production and flowering time.
No difference in PNGase activity could be detected (in fact, the activity was absent from both wild-type and mutant plants), nor was that of TGase.
No difference in sucrose content with respect to wild type, however, a 33% lower starch content was observable at the end of the day compared to wild type plants.
No differences between wild type and  mutant alleles in loosely bound xyloglucan.
No differences in expression intensity, relative to wild type, could be detected.
No differences in starch or maltose contents compared to wildtype.
No differences were observed under hourly R pulses or continuous FR between wild-type and mutant plants.
No differences with respect to the frequency or timing of germination on soil, either in full light or in total darkness, and the rate and extent of hypocotyl elongation in dark-grown parvus seedlings are indistinguishable from that of wild-type seedlings.
No different from wild-type plants in size, form or color with wild-type levels of thiamin, ThMP and ThDP.
No double homozygous mutants recovered. In reciprocal crosses both pans1/+ osd1/+ F1 plants were obtained indicating that both male and female pans1 osd1 gametes are viable and functional and that therefore the synthetic lethality is a sporophytic pheno- type. However in the pans1/+ osd1/+ X WT cross, there is a small but significant reduction in seed set (6.9 ? 1.3 missing seeds per silique) when compared to wild type.
No drop in total Chl levels.
No effect of mutant allele on growth, development or defense responses.
No effect of the1-3 on the bot1-1 phenotype.
No embryo defects were found.
No embryo development defects.
No emission of NO (nitric oxide) under condition in which wild-type does. Wounding-induced NO production is however still observed.
no expression of atRZ-1a
No gross morphological or growth defects compared to wild type.
no homozygotes were recovered from the heterozygous mutant, mutant pollen appeared normal by Alexander stain but failed to germinate, the organization of the male germ unit (MGU) is disrupted, the vegetative nuclei were malformed with displacement of the two sperm cells, or the entire MGU were mislocalized to the pollen periphery.
No homozygous mutants could be recovered in selfed seed suggesting that loss of MIS12 causes embryo lethality.
No increased tolerance to arsenic compared to wild type.
No increase in H2O2 content in light- or dark-adapted mutant plants.
No increase of germination or restoration of male fertility compared to the single ga1-3 mutant.
No inhibition of stimulation of cell division and greening of hypocotyl-derived calli when treated with cytokinin (similar to wildtype response).
No leaf trichomes. Has lower seed density and higher (8% increase) seed oil content. No difference in seed size, weight, or fatty acid composition.
No loss of cytokinin-dependent chlorophyll retention in leaves (under dark conditions causing the so-called 'dark-induced senescence').
No Major recognizable developmental defects, apart from somewhat rounded cotyledons compared to those of wild type plants.
No metaxylem and no phloem differentiation.
no modification of water soluble polysaccharides (WSPs) content.
no morphological visible phenotype observed
Non-described subtle phenotype.
None of the double mutants arrest at the seedling stage, and even though severely compromised, mutant plantlets survive to a mature stage.
No new leaf and flower phenotypes were observed compared to the single mutant parents, and the biomass of the double mutant lines fell statistically in the same group as that of both single parents.
Non-flowering defect.
Nongerminating, male sterile.
Non-germinating seed phenotype in fully homozygous progeny, which can be bypassed by separating the embryos from the testa and transferring them to fresh agar plates.
Non-photochemical quenching (NPQ) is slightly increased in the mutant.
Non-photochemical quenching (NPQ) reduced to a much greater extent in both induction and amplitude compared to either single mutants.
Nonphotochemical quenching measurements were lower than either of the single mutants.
no observable phenotype
No observable phenotype. The mutant has less malate and fumarate in the vacuole. The mutant showed stronger inhibition of oxygen evolution at low pH values.
No observable phenotype in single mutant.
No observable phenotype under normal (125 &#956;mol photons/m2/s), high (450 &#956;mol photons/m2/s) or low (15 or 50 &#956;mol photons/m2/s) light.
No observed effect of the structure of both rhamnogalacturonan I and II.
No obvious, morphological defects.  Expression of AtSN1,typically used as a marker gene silenced by RdDM, is reduced in jmj24-1 plants. Also , the mutant has increased methylation on solo LTR and SDC.
no obvious auxin-related growth phenotype
no obvious auxin-related growth phenotype, but roots show mild auxin resistance
No obvious differences in the morphology of the ungerminated pollen grains.
No obvious flowering-time phenotype.
No obvious gross morphological changes with the exception that siliques are shorter and contained reduced numbers of seed.  Abnormal pollen accounts for approximately 30% of all pollen grains.
No obvious leaf developmental defects.
No obvious morphological defects. Defective in C-U RNA editing at ndhB (95225).
No obvious morphological phenotype. RNA editing assay shows defect in C-U RNA editing of psbE.
no obvious phenotype
no obvious phenotype, endurance to toxic concentration of phenylalanine (2 mM) which did not influence development of roots and leaves of the mutant nor did a high level of phenylalanine (10 mM) arrested germination as observed in the wildtyp
No obvious phenotype, when grown on soil in the greenhouse or in vitro on a solid medium with complete nutrients. In addition, no obvious difference in the level of chlorosis was observed under Fe starvation between mutant plants and wild type.
no obvious phenotype.
No obvious phenotype different from those of trn1-2 or trn2-4 was observed in double mutant.
No obvious phenotype when grown at the restrictive temperature (29 degrees C) that produces the topless phenotype in the tpl-1 mutant.
No obvious phenotypic changes in the first (G1) or second (G2) generation. However, starting in G1, the telomeric smear in AtTERT-deficient plants was replaced by several sharp bands. By G2 at least 11 discrete telomeric fragments were visible.
No obvious phenotypic difference in growth or development with respect to wild type.  More abundant 34:3-PtdMEA (phosphatidylmethylethanolamine) than wt.
No obvious root growth phenotypes.
No obvious visible phenotype, low level of NPQ following a 40-s illumination, thylakoid lumen thickness larger, increase in total pmf (large increase in deltaPsi and slight decrease in dpH).
No obvious visible phenotype.
No other significant differences from WT were detected in mutant seedlings in response to cR, cB, or cW.
No peroxisome-associated defects.
No phenotype as single knock-out; tga1 tga4 double knock-out plants are more susceptible to Pseudomonas syringae pv. maculicola ES4326 than wild-type.
no phenotype under standard growth conditions.  Hypersensitive to UV light. Hypersensitive to methyl methanesulfonate (MMC), a DNA alkylating agent. Enhanced resistance to increasing concentrations of MMC as compared to wild type.
No reduction in maltose and matotriose production.
no reduction in the growth of the bacterial pathogen PstDC3000.
No remarkable phenotype in its germination and vegetative growth. Delayed starch degradation in the outer seed integument but no difference in the embryo. Starches of columnar shape disappear sooner than smaller granules in the inner layer of the outer integument. Shape of hexagonal epidermal cells is severely distorted. Thinner and more heterogeneous distribution of mucilage at periphery of seeds. These phenotypes could be complemented by exogenous application of gibberellin GA4.
Normal fertility compared to wildtype.
Normal flowering response under long and short days. Loss of flc supresses the phenotype of hlp1-1
Normal flowers apart from a reduction in the number of stamens.
Normal germination compared to wild-type plants  in response to varying red light fluences.
Normal growth and development. No embryo lethality observed.
Normal or slightly reduced sensitivity to cytokinin in root growth assay (exogenous application of cytokinins inhibits wildtype root elongation).
Normal or slightly reduced sensitivity to cytokinin in shoot induction assay (exogenous application of cytokinins induces wildtype shoot formation).
Normal phenotype during vegetative growth and floral organ development; but reduced fertility.
Normal roots.
Normal vascular morphology.
Normal vascular system in adventitious roots, although the hypocotyl and primary root develop aborted vascular tissues.
Normal vegetative growth and development, but moderate to severe reduction in fertility.  Meiosis defective, specifically the presence of numerous univalents at metaphase I and a marked reduction in chiasma frequency.  Early development of meiotic nuclei appears normal but synapsis of homologous chromosomes is delayed and may be incomplete.
Normal vegetative growth and floral organs.
No root anatomy phenotype
No root growth at pH 4.3.
No significant alteration in chain length profile of amylopectin.
No significant alteration of amylase-to-amylopectine ratio.
No significant change in IAA or ABA levels.
No significant changes in ABA levels were observed.
No significant changes were observed regarding the amounts of coniferyl alcohol 4-<i>O</i>-glucoside and sinapyl alcohol 4-<i>O</i>-glucoside detected in the mutant compared to wildtype.
No significant difference in chlorophyll content between mutant and wildtype.
No significant difference in photosynthetic performance relative to wild-type plants.
No significant differences in the amounts of the major sugars of cell wall material, including Rha, were identified between the WT and rol1-2.  However, rol1-2 and lrx1 rol1-2 showed an approx 30% reduction in the RG II-specific monosaccharides 2-O-methyl-D-xylose and 2-O-methyl-L-fucose.  These methylated sugars are diagnostic components of the two large Rha-containing side chains of RG II, and their reduced abundance may reflect a defect in the synthesis of RG II.
No significant meristem identity defects or flowering time defects. Rosette leaves are divided at the base and form one or two leaflets.
No significant phenotype in shoot organs.
No significant response in the cytokinin-induced assay for stimulation of cell division and greening of hypocotyl-derived calli.
No starch branching enzyme activity detected.
No suppression of the light-dependent cop1 phenotype where seedlings bleach and die when transferred from darkness to light. This is in contrast to the phenotype observed in the other two double mutants: cop1-4/hyh and cop1-6/hyh.
Not embryo lethal and no obvious developmental defects.
Not impaired in NO biosynthesis in response to exogenous H2O2 compared to wild-type.
No tonoplast V-ATPase activity. Severely reduced rosette size. pH shifted to pH 6.4 in double mutants from 5.9 in WT. Reduced leaf growth under short- and long-day conditions is accompanied by varying  degrees of leaf tip and flower necrosis. Calcium content in leaf extracts of vha-a2 vha-a3 plants grown in soil under LD conditions was >2-fold lower than  in WT plants. In the presence of increasing  external concentrations of NaCl neither growth inhibition nor accumulation of sodium, potassium, and chloride was significantly different from WT.
No trace of &beta;-carotene-derived xanthophylls.
Not significantly affected in lateral root development.
No variation in sucrose content of leaves placed under both normal temperature or cold treatment (24h) compared to wild type leaves.
No vegetative developmental defects, but a portion of the ovules in mature siliques were white that then turned brown and wrinkled.
No vegetative growth defects but display short silique elongation, suggesting fertility defects.  Male and female gametophytes abort.
No visible change in plant growth, development or pigmentation.
no visible difference in leaf morphology and variegation when grown under normal light and temperature conditions compared to wild-type.
No visible mutant phenotype.
No visible or biochemically determinable mutant phenotype observed under nutrient-sufficient conditions.
No visible phenotype
No visible phenotype, low level of NPQ following a 40-s illumination.
No visible phenotype.
no visible phenotype. decreased heme contents in roots
no visible phenotype. decreased heme contents in roots.
no visible phenotype. Mutant seeds displayed reduced germination rates. A modest but significant decrease of 5-CH3-PteGlu(n) and 5-CHO-PteGlu(n) (by 11 and 33%, respectively) was observed in dry seeds of the mutant as compared with the wild-type, resulting in a decrease in total folate content by 11%
no visible phenotype. Showed 35% reduction in light-induced stomatal opening compared to wild type plants
No visible phenotype.  Unable to sustain growth on urea as sole nitrogen source.  No urease activity detected.
no visible phenotype although the isolated leaf mesophyll protoplasts contain 20% less malate.
No visible phenotype compared to Col-0/gl1 wild-type.
No visible phenotype in single mutant detected.
No visible phenotype under constant far-red light conditions.
no visible phenotype under standard growth conditions. delayed growth when germinated with no added sucrose. severe seedling chlorosis and growth defects when germinated in alkaline soil where iron is limited. defect in photosynthetic electron transport. chloroplasts contained 75%   less Fe(III) chelate reductase activity, 33% less iron, and reduced level of cytb6f and PSII/LHCII.
No visible phenotype under typical growth conditions.
No visible phenotype was observed during vegetative stage. In seeds, ABA content was reduced to half in mutants, compared to wild type. Freshly harvested seeds germinated at a rate similar to wild type seed. Seed dormancy was not affected. When germinated on medium supplemented with paclobutrazol, germination rate was higher in mutant seeds than in the wild type.
No visible phenotype was observed during vegetative stage. When germinated on medium supplemented with paclobutrazol, germination rate was higher in double mutant seeds than in the single mutants or wild type, i.e., paclobutrazol resistance was enhanced in double mutant seeds. Dormancy was reduced in double mutants, and levels of ABA in the seeds were up to 18% lover than in the wild type or single mutants.
No visible phenotype when grown in the dark.
No visible phenotype when grown on regular soil in greenhouse. On agar medium under low Fe supply, germination was arrested during first four days. This phenotype was transient, since seedlings recovered and cotyledons regained green color. When grown on calcareous soil, double mutant seedlings did not green and appeared bleached after 6 days, and very few seedlings survived beyond seedling stage, with early lethality over 90% (in Fe restrictive alkaline soil conditions).
no visible phenotypic effect
No visible root phenotype.
nph4-1 arf19 double mutant;  agravitropic response in both hypocotyls and roots; impaired phototropic response in hypocotyls; impaired lateral root formation; small plant size; small and epinastic rosette leaves; reduced auxin sensitivity
nrt1.6-2 mutants have a much higher rate of seed abortion than wild type plants and aberrant embryonic development, often associated with the suspensor, can be observed by the one-cell and four-cell stages. Under normal nitrogen conditions, seeds of nrt1.6-2 mutants accumulate less nitrate than wild-type seeds. The silique length, mature seed weight, and germination rate of unaborted seeds do not differ noticeably between nrt1.6-2 mutants and wild type plants.
nrt1.6-3 mutants have a much higher rate of seed abortion than wild type plants and aberrant embryonic development, often associated with the suspensor, can be observed by the one-cell and four-cell stages.
nrt1.6-3 mutants have a much higher rate of seed abortion than wild type plants and aberrant embryonic development, often associated with the suspensor, can be observed by the one-cell and four-cell stages. The silique length, mature seed weight, and germination rate of unaborted seeds do not differ noticeably between nrt1.6-3 mutants and wild type plants.
ntra ntrb rml1 plants do not show any shoot and root  meristematic activity. Meristematic  activities of most ntra ntrb rml1 plants are rescued when  transferred to Murashige and Skoog (MS) medium containing  GSH. The germination rate of the ntra ntrb  rml1 seeds is also perturbed.
Nuclei are significantly smaller than wild-type nuclei.
Null allele.
Null mutants of DCP1, DCP2, and VCS accumulate capped mRNAs with a reduced degradation rate. The homozygous progeny of these mutants also share a similar lethal phenotype at the seedling cotyledon stage, with disorganized veins, swollen root hairs, and altered epidermal cell morphology.
Number of carpels not statistically significant form that of clv2-1 alone.
Number of carpels reduced relative to clv3 single mutant.
Number of cotyledons varies from one to four.
nyc1 mutants have elevated levels of chlorophyll b following dark-induced senescence relative to wild type plants, indicating a defect in chlorophyll b degradation. Lhcb proteins associated with LHCII also persist for longer in these mutants than in wild type plants during a prolonged dark incubation.
Observed temperature-dependent effects on both period and rhythm robustness as those seen in gi-11.
Obvious enhancement of the excess branching phenotype of the hdg11-1 trichome.
Occasionally produces inflorescence stems with abnormal and non-functional flowers which did not produce seeds.
Of the 269 mutant embryos examined, 6% were arrested at the 1-cell embryo stage, 19% were arrested at the 2- to 4-cell stage, 38% were arrested from the 6-cell to the 8-cell stage, and 18% were arrested at the 16-cell stage.
Oil bodies of ole1 ole2 double mutant are much larger than ole1 and ole2 single mutants. ole1 ole2 seeds hardly germinate. None of them that are treated with freezing (at -30?C for 1 day) germinate.
Oil bodies of ole1 ole3 double mutant are much larger than ole1 and ole3 single mutants. ole1 ole3 seeds hardly germinate. None of them that are treated with freezing (at -30?C for 1 day) germinate.
Oil bodies of ole2 ole3 double mutant are much larger than ole2 and ole3 single mutants. Treating ole2 ole3 seeds with freezing (at -30?C for 1 day) inhibits and delays their germination, although ole2 ole3 seeds without freezing germinate normally.
ole1 seeds have much larger oil bodies than wild-type. OLE1 deficiency leads to loss of freezing tolerance of Arabidopsis seeds. Treating ole1 seeds with freezing (at -30?C for 1 day) inhibits and delays their germination, although ole1 seeds without freezing treatment germinate normally. Seed oil bodies of ole1 ole2 and ole1 ole3 double mutants are much larger than ole1 mutant. ole1 ole2 and ole1 ole3 seeds hardly germinate. ole1 ole2 and ole1 ole3 double mutants seeds do not germinate when treated with freezing condition (at -30?C for 1 day).
ole2 seeds have larger oil bodies than wild-type. OLE2 dificiency leads to loss of freezing tolerance of Arabidopsis seeds. Treating ole2 seeds with freezing (at -30?C for 1 day) delays their germination, although ole2 seeds without freezing treatment germinate normally. Seeds of ole1 ole2 double mutant exhibit severe phenotypes. Oil bodies of ole1 ole2 double mutant are much larger than ole2. ole1 ole2 seeds hardly germinate. None of the ole1 ole2 seeds that are treated with freezing (at -30?C for 1 day) germinate. Oil bodies of ole2 ole3 double mutant are much larger than ole2. Treating ole2 ole3 seeds with freezing (at -30?C for 1 day) inhibits and delay their germination, although ole2 ole3 seeds without freezing treatment germinate normally.
ole3 seeds have larger oil bodies than wild-type. OLE3 dificiency leads to loss of freezing tolerance of Arabidopsis seeds. Treating ole3 seeds with freezing (at -30?C for 1 day) slightly delay their germination, although ole3 seeds without freezing treatment germinate normally. Oil bodies of ole1 ole3 double mutant are much larger than ole3. ole1 ole3 seeds hardly germinate. None of ole1 ole3 seeds treated with freezing (at -30?C for 1 day) germinate. Oil bodies of ole2 ole3 double mutant are much larger than ole3. Treating ole2 ole3 seeds with freezing (at -30?C for 1 day) inhibits and delays their germination, although ole2 ole3 seeds without freezing germinate normally.
ole4 seeds have slightly larger oil bodies than wild-type, and germinate normally.
On Al3+ medium, the mutant has significantly shorter roots than the Col wild type. In the absence of aluminum stress, the roots of mutant and wild type grew similarly.
Once they were transferred to the long day conditions (after being grown in constant light until they reached the rosette leaf stage and were ready to bolt), the mutant plants continued to grow similarly to wild type except that their growth was slightly reduced and their final height was ~80% of that of wild type.
Once they were transferred to the long day conditions (after being grown in constant light until they reached the rosette leaf stage and were ready to bolt), the mutant plants stopped growing.
On control medium, displayed shorter roots than wild type.  On MeJA medium, hypersensitivity to the additive was shown with even shorter roots.
One hour prior to the end of the dark period, the amount of maltose found in the mutant was shown to be statistically significantly reduced (55% of the amount found in wild type).
One-month-old plants have a more compact rosette than wild type plants, resulting from a reduction in petiole length. Additionally, inflorescence stems were shorted and thicker, with larger cauline leaves.
One-month-old plants have a reduced apical dominance with multiple, shortened primary inflorescence stems and elongated secondary inflorescence stems.
One of the most fertile alleles amongst the weak <i>bri1</i> mutants.
One quarter of the seedlings were arrested at the seedling stage, failing to grow true leaves. Scanning electron microscopy revealed that leaf primordia were initiated, but their further growth and expansion was largely delayed or did not take place.
One quarter of the seeds are aborted in the siliques of heterozygous mutants and no homozygous mutants have been recovered suggesting that SUFE3 is essential for viability.
On fosmidomycin-free medium, the mutant seedlings require more time than wildtype for both greening and development of true leaves.
Only 10% of mutant seeds germinate immediately after harvest, compared to 70% for wild type Columbia (reported to have low dormancy). This mutant has higher levels of dormancy.
Only 3% of the ovules in the mutant showed differentiated female gametophytes. 74% of the fully developed ovules had no embryo sac.
Only 80.0% of mutant seedlings emerged. At 6 d, a percentage of the emerged mutant seedlings would not grow and develop into viable plants. These seedlings had white cotyledons, and they eventually died. At 19 d, 91.0% of the wild-type seeds that germinated had produced viable rosettes with four to five pairs of true leaves. For the mutants, only 72.2% of seeds that had germinated (58% of those sown) produced rosettes. At this stage, the mutant had only two to three pairs of true leaves.
Only female reproductive tissue is affected in the mutant, as shown by the fact that mutant pollen produces a normal seed set when applied to wild-type flowers. Considerably more siliques  are produced in the mutants, probably because of the reduced fertility of individual flowers.
Only slight differences between mutant and wild type plants with regard to rosette radius and root length.
On nutrient agar supplied with Mn2+ concentrations that ranged from basal to toxic levels, the mutant was more sensitive to Mn2+ than the wild type, as determined by significantly reduced shoot dry weights. Analysis of Mn2+ in shoots showed that both wild type and mutant accumulated similar Mn2+  concentrations at the various Mn2+ supplies, despite the differences in growth.
on observable phenotype
On pond water without sucrose, most  wak2-1 seedlings arrested or slowed growth.  The wak2-1 seedlings were significantly (P < 0.001) shorter  than wild-type, with the roots being affected more than the  hypocotyls. Arrest of  wak2-1 on pond water was rescued by the addition of 60 mM sucrose,  fructose or glucose, but not sorbitol or mannitol. When grown in the dark for 3 weeks on soil, wak2-1 plants have less hypocotyl extension than wild type. wak2-1 affects the rate of cell elongation in roots.  than the wild-type
organ-elongated phenotypes, with their inflorescences, leaves and petioles all longer than those of wild-type plants
Other than the pollen abnormality there is no visible phenotype. Exine structures collapsed, in which no normal tectum or bacula were identified. A number of microspores collapsed and their contents leaked into locules. Small, distorted mature pollen grains. Pollen is sterile.
Other than the pollen abnormality there is no visible phenotype. Exine structures collapsed, in which the tectum has disappeared and hte bacula was deformed into a globular protrusion. A number of microspores collapsed adn their contents leaked into locules.Small, distorted mature pollen grains.
ots1-1 mutants flower at the same time as wild-type plants when grown under long day conditions and appear phenotypically normal. However, there are abnormal phenotypes associated with the ots1-1 ots1-2 double mutant.
ots2-1 mutants flower at the same time as wild-type plants when grown under long day conditions and appear phenotypically normal. However, there are abnormal phenotypes associated with the ots1-1 ots1-2 double mutant.
Outer integument of the ovule is absent and the inner integument is replaced by a relatively amorphous collar-like structure.
Overaccumulates H2O2 by a different mechanism not dependent on photosynthesis.
Overall growth and morphology of mutant plant was largely affected, two week-old seedling had about 50% smaller organs compared to the wild type. Adult mutant plant had nearly all axillary meristems active, resulting in formation over 100 leaves, and resembling a dense sphere. Vein pattern defects in cotyledons, leaves, sepals and petals were observed. In contrast to the wild type, in which these organs all have linear veins that are continuous with at least one other vein, in sfc1 mutant these organs' secondary and tertiary veins are largely replaced by small segments of discontinuous veins, which we call vascular islands. Patterning defects are manifest in cotyledon provascular tissue, suggesting that the patterning defect occurs early in organogenesis. Mutant plants have exaggerated responses to exogenous auxin.
Overall increase of PSII proteins (CP43, D1, D2, Lhcb2, PsbP) in the mutant to about 138% in the compared to wild-type levels.
Overall morphology of the mutant plants was not altered. Increased accumulation of nicotianamine was detected in shoots, while seeds of both ysl1 knockouts contained less iron and nicotianamine than wild-type seeds, even when produced by plants grown in the presence of an excess of iron. Mutant seeds germinated slowly, but this defect was rescued by an iron supply
Overall morphology similar to that of wild type exception made of the seed production.
Overall reduction of PSII proteins (CP43, D1, D2, Lhcb2, PsbP) in the mutant to about 75% of the wt levels.
oxp1-1 cannot convert 5-oxoproline (5OP) into glutamine. Elevated levels of 5OP accumulate in the the leaves, stems, roots, flowers, and siliques of this mutant, while the level of glutamate is reduced. oxp1-1 mutants have normal seedling root growth and do not display any other morphological defects. They appear to have normal levels of Asp, Ser, Gln, Gly, Thr, Arg, and Ala, and have a wild-type sensitivity to nitrogen deficiency.
p5cs1-1 mutants accumulate less proline in response to salt stress than wild-type seedlings. Their roots are hypersensitive to salt stress and they have increased evidence of oxdative stress and lipid peroxidation under salt stress than wild type plants.
p5cs1-2 mutants accumulate less proline in response to salt stress than wild-type seedlings. They have increased evidence of oxdative stress in response to salt stress than wild type plants. Some genes involved in ROS detoxification are differentially expressed in  WT and p5cs1-2 mutants.
p5cs1-3 mutants accumulate less proline in response to salt stress than wild-type seedlings.
p5cs1-4 mutants accumulate less proline in response to salt stress than wild-type seedlings. Their roots are hypersensitive to salt stress and they have increased evidence of oxdative stress and lipid peroxidation under salt stress than wild type plants. Some genes involved in ROS detoxification are differentially expressed in  WT and p5cs1-4 mutants.
Pale and slow growing.
Pale brown seeds and unbranched trichomes.
pale brown seeds due to reduced levels of brown pigment in the outer layers of the seed coat (testa); seeds appear to darken during storage; approximately wild-type anthocyanin levels observed in leaves, stems and other tissues.
pale brown seeds due to reduced levels of brown pigment in the outer layers of the seed coat (testa).
Pale colour.
Pale green. Lower levels of chlorophyll a and chlorophyll b. Mesophyll development defects.
Pale green cotyledons and true leaves.  Development of true leaves was delayed fro 2 days in the mutant plants.  Shape of the true leaves was small, narrow, with some serrations.
Pale green cotyledons with drastically reduced chlorophyll content in 3- to 4-day-old seedlings.  The chlorophyll deficiency was limited to the young cotyledons and was restored to the wild-type level in 8-day-old seedlings.
pale green leaf
pale-green leaf phenotype during the first weeks and a severely growth-retarded.
Pale-green leaves and a drastic reduction in size.
Pale green plants
Pale green seedlings, short shoots, short siliques and reduced seed set. Mutants do not accumulate CSP41b protein and CSP41a protein levels are reduced.
Pale green seedlings. Can only be grown on media.Chloroplasts have increased grana stacks and fewer stroma thylakoids. Decreased photosynthtic efficiency.
Pale yellow-green leaves.
pale yellow inner leaves and a developmental defect, serious impairment of chloroplast 16S rRNA processing and accumulation.
Pale yellowish sepaloid second-whorl organs.
pale yellow seeds, no flavonoid in tapetum cells
Palisade mesophyll cells are reduced in number but apparently normal in size.  Plants have pointed leaves and increased air spaces in the palisade mesophyll.
pans1 tam1 double mutant plants showed an increase in viable pollen and seed set compared to the pans1 mutant, indicating genetic suppression of the male sterile phenotype of pans1 by a tam1 loss of function allele.
par1-2 mutants have defects in leaf venation patterns, as well as several other developmental defects including reduced stature, reduced apical dominance, and reduced fertility relative to wild type plants. They accumulate pre-rRNA transcripts that have not been spliced at the A0 site.
parl1-1 mutants, initially identified based on their aberrant parallel venation pattern in juvenile leaves, exhibit several other developmental defects. They have abnormal venation patterns in their cotyledons, adult leaves, petals, and sepals. In addition, they are shorter, have abnormal leaf shapes, and have reduced apical dominance, rosette size, fertility, and root length compared to wild type plants.  The normal adaxial/abaxial arrangement of xylem and phloem is maintained in parl1-1 mutant leaves, but, they have a reduced palisade mesophyll layer in the leaf. There are aberrant expression patterns for the DR5:GUS reporter and the Athb8:GUS reporter in the parl1-1 mutants.
Partial derepression of SUP gene silencing (induced by clk-st), leading to plants with a wildtype  floral phenotype.
Partially rescues the downward orientation of siliques characteristic of bp single mutants. Rescue of partial loss of apical dominance phenotype characteristic of bp mutants. Short plants, although taller than bp single mutants. Partial rescue of primary inflorescence stem internode length characteristic of bp single mutants.
Partially restored stem height (59% of Ler wild type).
Partially suppressed the abnormality of zig-1 in both gravitropism  and stem morphology.
Partially suppresses pny;bp phenotypes such as dwarfism, loss of apical dominance and silique orientation.
Partial rescue of the rpl repla phenotype.
Partial rescue of the sly1-10 dwarf phenotype but no significant suppression of the germination or fertility defects.
Partial restoration of the hypocotyl growth defect of prc1-8.
Partial reversion of the hypocotyl-elongation defect of eli1-1.
Partial reversion of the hypocotyl-elongation defect of pom1-2.
Partial reversion of the hypocotyl-elongation defect of rsw1-10.
Partial root gravitropic phenotype.
Partial suppression of the dwarf phenotype.
Partial suppression of the gid1a-1 gid1b-1 gid1c-1 triple mutant phenotype.
Partial suppression of the strong sti-EMU phenotype resulting in sta-like trichomes.
parvus-3 mutants, which have substantially less xylose than wild type plants,  develop more slowly, produce narrower leaves, show xylem irregularities, appear darker green, and lose the ability to reproduce. Mutants seem to be defective in the production of an oligosaccharide leader found on the reducing end of most xylan chains. Their xylan chains seem to show the normal branching pattern found in wild type xylan chains, but glucuronic acid (GlcUA) is largely replaced by methylglucuronic acid (MeGlcUA). They are capable of accumulating cellulose throughout development, but they have lower total cellulose levels than WT plants at middle and late developmental stages.
Patterning of trichomes is not affected.  However, there is reduced trichome branching compared to the wild type, Wassilewskija.
Patterning of trichomes is not affected.  However, there is reduced trichome branching with respect to the wild type, Columbia.
pavement cells, stomatal guard cells and trichomes, on the adaxial and abaxial surface of mature mutant leaves are morphologically indistinguishable from those of wild-type leaves but are smaller in the parvus mutant (ca. 60% of wild type)
pdi6-1 plants show reduced levels of photoinhibition under high light conditions compared to wild-type plants. While there is no change in either antenna architecture or photosystem II amounts, these plants show a higher rate of D1 synthesis. The higher D1 turnover rates account for the resistance to photoionhibition.
pdi6-2 plants show reduced levels of photoinhibition under high light conditions compared to wild-type plants. While there is no change in either antenna architecture or photosystem II amounts, these plants show a higher rate of D1 synthesis. The higher D1 turnover rates account for the resistance to photoionhibition.
Pectin composition of 10-d-old seedlings obtained by polysaccharide analysis using carbohydrate gel electrophoresis (PACE) shows an increased arabinan:galactan ratio.
pen1-1 mutant plants allowed a sevenfold  higher incidence of B. g. hordei penetration compared with wildtype plants, as well as a concomitant increase in the incidence of hypersensitive-response-like cell death induced by B. g. hordei.
per1 plants show normal root hair development under control conditions but displayed an inhibited root hair elongation phenotype upon Pi deficiency. The per1 mutant exhibits a pleiotropic phenotype under control conditions, resembling Pi-deficient plants in several aspects.
permits efficient Blumeria graminis f. sp. hordei (Bgh) entry, initiation of postinvasive fungal growth invariably ceases, and this coincides with a cell death response of epidermal cells with haustorial complexes.
Peroxide production triggered by Pp Emco5 is greatly reduced but not the typical trailing necrosis.
Peroxisomes defective. Division is abnormal and peroxisomes have aberrant morphology (observed in plants carrying an marker-YFP-PTS1).
Persistent reduction in leaf starch content measured over the course of the day.
Petal epidermal cells do not have a wt conical structure and are flattened. Epidermal cuticular ridges on these cells are completely absent.
Petals, sepals, stamens and pistils are all larger than those of wild type.
Petals, sepals, stamens and pistils were all of reduced length.
Petals are usually missing in ufo-11 flowers or are sometimes replaced by filaments or petal/stamen mosaic organs. ufo-11 flowers have fewer second-whorl organs compared with rbe-3 mutants and also sometimes produce mosaic petaloid stamens in the third whorl.
Petals may vary in size, shape and number; sepals are assymetrically placed and folded. Sepals also may lack trichomes and their epidermal cells may lack the typical striated pattern seen in wild-type sepals.
PGI plastidial activity is reduced to 2% of that of wild-type whereas cytosolic PGI activity is unaffected.
pgp4-1 mutants have 25% longer root hairs than wild type plants.
Phenotype not described.
Phenotype pronounced in seedlings, in particular after the transfer of plants initially grown at 21?C to the elevated temperature of 31?C, but is not obvious in mature plants.
Phenotype resembles MPK4 mutant.Leaves are dark green and curled.Constitutively overproduces SA and   exhibits enhanced resistance to biotrophic pathogens. Insensitive to jasmonic acid.Enhanced basal   expression of PR1 other SA dependent genes.
Phenotype resembles the emf1-2 single mutant. Semi-open, small petioleless,oval shaped cotyledons and short hypocotyl and leaf primordia.
Phenotype very similar to tan-1
Phenotypically dwarfed with necrotic lesions, bleached leaves, reduced leaf area, lower chlorophyll content, shorter hypocotyls and fewer flowers.
Phenotypically dwarfed with necrotic lesions, bleached leaves, reduced leaf area, lower chlorophyll content, shorter hypocotyls and fewer flowers.  Weaker phenotype compared to other ssadh alleles; inflorescences were 25-30% higher than those of ssadh-1.
Phenotypic differences from wild type development first became evident with the emergence of the first true leaves. All leaves were severely twisted and irregularly shaped and many lacked large parts of the leaf lamina. This twisting phenotype was not restricted to the vegetative phase but involved cauline leaves, the inflorescence stem and all floral whorls.
Phosphorylation of D1, D2 and CP43 proteins of PSII core was reduced in the stn8 mutants in comparison with the wild type. No difference in phenotype between mutant and wild type plants under normal growth conditions.
Phosphorylation of  D1, D2 and CP43 proteins of PSII core was  reduced in the stn8 mutants in comparison  with the wild type. No difference  in phenotype between mutant and wild type  plants under normal growth conditions.
Photorespiratory mutant that shows a wild-type phenotype when grown at high CO2 (3000-4500 ppm) or in air at irradiance below 30 ?mol.m-2s-1. Significantly decreased rosette biomass when grown in air above 100 ?mol.m-2s-1 irradiance. Lesions appear in a photoperiod-dependent manner : few or none are observed in 8h photoperiods, even up to 400 ?mol.m-2s-1 growth irradiance, while in 16h photoperiods lesion formation is observed at 100 ?mol.m-2s-1 irradiance and becomes extensive as irradiance is increased. Despite lesion formation, plants survive to flowering, though final rosette mass and seed production are decreased compared to wild-type.
Photorespiratory phenotype: chlorosis at ambient CO2 levels, fully rescued at 3% CO2.
Photosynthetic phenotype. Specifically there is a restriction in photorespiration with a decrease in the rate of oxidation of photorespiratory glycine in the mitochondrion. This change leads to an associated reduced photosynthetic carbon assimilation rate.
phs1-1 exhibits phenotypes indicative of compromised cortical microtubule functions, such as left-handed helical growth of seedling roots, defective anisotropic growth at low doses of microtubule-destabilizing drugs, enhancement of the temperature-sensitive microtubule organization1-1 phenotype, and less ordered and more fragmented cortical microtubule arrays compared with the wild type.
PhyA-201 is also known as fre1-1. Under normal growth conditions, phyA-201 mutant plants are indistinguishable from wild-type plants. However, when partially shaded to very low light intensities, but not darkened, mature leaves of phyA-201 show an enhanced rate of leaf yellowing compared to wild-type plants. For more information on this line, see the original reports by Nagatani et al 1993, doi: http:/&#8203;/&#8203;dx.&#8203;doi.&#8203;org/&#8203;10.&#8203;1104/&#8203;pp.&#8203;102.&#8203;1.&#8203;269 and by Reed et al 1994, doi: http:/&#8203;/&#8203;dx.&#8203;doi.&#8203;org/&#8203;10.&#8203;1104/&#8203;pp.&#8203;104.&#8203;4.&#8203;1139
phyllotaxy defects. Partial loss of apical dominance, dwarfed. defects in replum differentiation and septum fusion.
pip5k5 mutants do not show any obvious defects in pollen germination or pollen tube growth. But, these processes are compromised in pip5k4 pip5k5 double mutants.
plae-green phenotype. Growth rate severely reduced compared to wild-type. The thylakoid membranes are arranged in a disorderly fashion and do not develop distinct grana stacks; extensive adhesion of two to a few thylakoid membranes is observed instead. No distinct differences in the size and the number of chloroplasts between wild-type and mutant. Starch granules are not found in the mutant chloroplasts suggesting a reduction of photosynthetic activity.
Plant have pale green leaves and develop lesions on the young leaves.  Lesions begin as a small spot or stripe of collapsed tissue usually appearing in the middle part of the young leaves.
Plants appear normal during vegetative growth. Phenotypic alterations start after the switch to reproductive development. Flowers have an increased number of sepals and petals. Floral organ numbers are highly variable. Individual organs varied in size. Carpels failed to fuse resulting in severe reduction of fertility. In addition, plants display a highly unequal and distorted arrangement of flowers, both with respect to the angle formed by two consecutive flowers and their distance from each other along the axis of the stem.
plants appear normal under normal growth conditions. When grown on low-nitrogen medium with alanine supplementation, the mutant plants showed reduced growth.
Plants are defective in lateral root growth, seedlings grew slower than the wild-type and had a slightly yellowish colour, with fewer emerging lateral roots, and a strong incurvature phenotype in young leaves.
Plants are dwarf. Leaves are smaller and contain fewer cells and fewer lobes than wild type. Reduced number of trichome branches. Petals are narrow. Roots are more severely affected and produce short root hairs. Cell files are irregular and the elongation zone is much reduced.
Plants are dwarf and reach only 15% of the height of wild type. Roots lack root hairs- the initiate but do not develop further than a bulge. Leaves are small with reduced surface area and fewer lobes. Leaf trichomes are abnormal and contain fewer branches. Also defects in flower morphology, reduced fertility, abnormal inflorescence structure and abnormal silique development.
Plants are dwarfed. In the hca2 mutant inflorescence stems, petioles,and main veins of leaves, the ordered patterning of vascular bundles is replaced by a continuous vascular cambium undergoing periclinal divisions to produce radial files of xylem and phloem.Interfascicular cambium is extensively formed/developed between the vascular bundles, and the area normally occupied by the interfascicular parenchyma cells is replaced by vascular tissues.  Continuous phloem tissue consisting of several layers of sieve tubes and companion cells encircles the vascular cambium in hca2.  The vascular tissue in the  hypocotyls and roots of hca2 seedlings exhibit a WT phenotye.
Plants are extremely small with a reduced number of leaves, leaves are sessile and the inflorescences are completely arrested.Enhanced de-repression of KNOX gene expression.
Plants are gametophyte lethal.  Both female gametophytes and pollen are affected.
Plants are hypersensitive to drought. Mutants have decreased stomatal conductance when grown in low relative humidity. Root architecture is affected: roots are 60% shorter than wild type and produce more lateral roots. Lateral roots are shortr and branched.Plants are shorter and leaves are yellow green. Chemically, the mutants have decreased sterols in the roots, decreased chlorophyll levels and increased levels of proline.
Plants are hypersensitive to methyl methanesulfonate and X-rays.  They are not impaired in T-DNA integration.  Do not display any growth, developmental, or fertility defects.
Plants are hypersensitive to Mitomycin C as determined by reduced growth on this medium.
Plants are indehiscent because siliques lack secondary walls except in vascular vessels.
Plants are pale green throughout development and reduced in size. Chloroplast development impaired and photosystem II proteins accumulate to reduced levels.
Plants are slower growing than single mutants or non-mutant siblings. Pale mutant color due to decreased number of mitochondria and peroxisomes.
Plants are sterile due to defects in meiosis.
Plants are stunted when grown in short days(8 hrs light). pub4-6 plants also accumulate more chloroplasts/cell area and chlorophyll.
Plants are very small and develop yellow or white tissue when grown under standard conditions. gun4-2 mutants produce a number of leaves and flowerlike structures after approximately 2 months on sucrose-containing media and are pale green in dim light.
Plants arrest early in development due to loss of shoot apical meristem but recover through adventitious shoot formation.
Plants carrying the tgd4-2  T-DNA insertion allele were stunted, pale yellow in color, and infertile.
Plants cold-shocked for 6h have an increased starch content compared to wildtype.
Plants did flower after 4 wk vernalization but considerably later than H51.
Plants display decreased sensitivity to the inhibitory effect of indole-3-butyric acid (IBA) on root elongation, while remaining sensitive to inhibitory concentrations of indole-3-acetic acid.  They maintain their ability to initiate lateral roots in response to IBA.
Plants displayed defects in inflorescence  development.
Plants display impaired intergenic processing of the polycistronic transcript rps7-ndhB, resulting in no detectable mature form of ndhB mRNA.
Plants do not flower and continue to produce leaves even after 200 days in long-day inductive conditions. Shoot meristems initiated only leaves.  SAMs respond to floral inductive signals but fail to induce floral meristem identity genes. Phyllotaxy in both reproductive and vegetative meristems is altered so that two organs are produced per node vs. the usual one.
plants exhibit abnormal organ morphology and stem glossiness
Plants exhibit loss of apical dominance, fasciation, abberrant phyllotaxy, and reduced leaf size. Over generations, the germination rate also decreases to below 20%.
Plants exhibit pleiotropic phenotypes; most aerial organs are reduced in size: leaves and floral organs are small and plants are shorter compared to wild-type; small cells in mature leaves and petals; rosette leaves are pointed at the apical end and the edges tend to curl upward; delayed flowering; high flower density in inflorescence; reduced internode elongation in the stems; increased number of coflorescences; under long-day conditions (16 hour light/8 hour darkness), plants produce more cauline leaves with axillary inflorescences before producing single flowers on the inflorescence stems than wild type plants; reduced male and female fertility; anthers from early-arising flowers often fail to dehisce, although late-arising flowers do produce pollen, the amount of pollen produced appears to be greatly reduced; reduced seed set in siliques.
Plants exhibit shorter hypocotyls and larger cotyledons under continuous white, red, blue, and far-red light.  They also have shorter rosette petioles compared to wild type. Hypocotyl cells in the mutant plants are shorter than those of wild type plants.
Plants frequently formed fused and/or fasciated inflorescences and generated multiple flowers from the same node.
Plants grown in Fe sufficient media are smaller relative to wild type but not chlorotic. Palisade parenchyma cells are abnormal.Abnormal Fe uptake and distribution.
Plants grown on agar plants show leftward skewing of root growth occasionally forming clockwise spirals with twisted epidermal cell files.
Plants grown on agar plates have roots that skew towards the left occasionally forming clockwise loops with twisted epidermal cell files. Also has reduced/delayed response to gravity.
Plants grown on sucrose supplemented media have reduced growth rate. Seedlings have pale yellow leaves that are thinner and more transparent than wild type. Under UV light they display high chlorophyll fluorescence. Plants lack functional photosystem I. Chloroplasts are morphologically abnormal with few lamellae and no assimilatory starch.
Plants have altered silencing movement with respect to the parent line.  Whereas the parent line has low levels of SUL mRNA and displays non-cell autonomous silencing, the mutants lost the silencing movement phenotype and accumulated high levels of SUL mRNA.  21-nt SUL siRNAs are undetectable in these plants, wherease the 24-nt siRNAs accumulated to similar levels as in the SUC-SUL parental line.
Plants have dwarf stature,short hypocotyls, small rosettes with thick, round leaves, and reduced inflorescence and root systems. Plants are early senescent and have reduced fertility. Also has abnormal root hair development. Plants overexpress JA, SA, ABA and ethylene.
Plants have higher capacity to tolerate freezing than WT plants before and after cold acclimation and are more tolerant to dehydration and salt stress.
Plants have impaired NDH (chloroplast Na(P)DH dehydrogenase) activity. They do not display any phenotype in photosynthetic electron transport.  A trace level of the protein NdhH is detectable in this mutant. Plants are defective in the RNA editing of the initiation codon of ndhD.
Plants have impaired NDH (chloroplast Na(P)DH dehydrogenase) activity. They do not display any phenotype in photosynthetic electron transport.  NdhH is almost undetectable in this mutant. Plants are defective in RNA edition of the initiation codon of ndhD.
Plants have impaired NDH (chloroplast Na(P)DH dehydrogenase) activity. They do not display any phenotype in photosynthetic electron transport. The NdhH level is mildly affected in these plants (25-50%). Plants are defective in the RNA editing of the initiation codon of ndhD.
Plants have several bigger mitochondria with a round shape coexisting with mitochondria of normal shape and size.
Plants have small stature, reduced cellulose and irregular xylem.
Plants have whitish green stems. Transpiration occurred more slowly in leaves.  The thickness of the cuticular layer of leaf epidermal cells is reduced.  Wax loads in leaves and stems are increased.
Plants heterozygous for the swa1 mutation had shorter siliques, aborted ovules, and showed a semisterile phenotype. The mutation mainly impaired female gametogenesis and caused a minor defect during male gametogenesis. Confocal microscopy revealed that megagametophyte development was asynchronous in swa1, causing embryo sacs to arrest at two-, four-, or eight-nucleate stages within the same pistil. A small fraction of the swa1 embryo sacs were able to develop into functional female gametophytes. The swa1 mutation also showed a slight reduction in penetrance through the male gametophyte, although the pollen grains were morphologically normal.
Plants homozygous for G&#945; allele gpa1-1 are less sensitive to O3 damage than wildtype Ws but more sensitive than Col-0.
Plants homozygous for G&#945; allele gpa1-2 are less sensitive to O3 damage than wildtype Ws but more sensitive than Col-0.
Plants homozygous for the Atcom1 mutant alleles do not show growth aberrations during vegetative  development. The mutants germinate and develop at the  same time and rate as wild-type plants. Rosette leaves are  normal in size, shape and number, and bolting is not delayed.  Inflorescences look normal, but none of the siliques of  Atcom1 mutant plants elongate, whereas shoots of wild-type  plants have long siliques. The short siliques of  the mutant plants are completely devoid  of seeds.
Plants homozygous for this insertion showed a severe reduction of thylakoid development/maintenance, ending up in seedling lethal.
Plants over expressing PRR5 show altered circadian functions. The amplitude of the ciradian response regulated genes CAB,CCA1 and LHY is significantly decreased. Plants are early flowering under long and short days.Hypersensitive in red right-mediated de-etiolation process.
Plants produce 50% nonviable pollen.
Plants produced very few seeds upon self-pollination and fertility was dramatically reduced as indicated by very short siliques with shrunken ovules.  Microsporogenesis is aberrant from the tetrad stage with abnormal callose accumulation, resulting in defective cell wall formation.  There are also defects in pollen germination. Primexine development and  sporopollenin deposition are blocked, disrupting exine formation.
Plants were still in the vegetative growth phase after 2 months growth in short day (SD) photoperiod (although WT plants had already flowered). Eventually, a few ctr1?1 plants did flower after 2 months in SDs.
Plants with albino phenotype which exhibit purple-tinted phenotype superimposed on the albino phenotype when grown sucrose-containing medium. ispH-1 plants develop normal roots, rosette leaves and inflorescences.
Plants with the genotype AXL/axl-1 axr1-12/axr1-12 had a slight but consistent reduction in RUB-CUL1 levels.
Plastids of cotyledons, leaves, and shoot apices in the mutant plants were characterized by the presence of electron-dense phytoferritin aggregates. Those clusters were not found in any chloroplasts of wild-type plants.
Pleiotropic defects in morphology.  Defects in cell shape and the random production of leaf primordia in the shoot apex are particularly prominent abnormalities.  The shoot apex is flat as opposed to domed.
Pleiotropic developmental defects. Serrated leaves, stunted growth, shorter roots on half strength MS medium, smaller siliques than wild type.
Pleiotropic phenotypes, such as pale-green leaf color, increased bushy appearance, and more open flower buds.
Pleiotropic phenotype with defects in numerous SCF-regulated pathways including auxin signaling, jasmonate signaling, flower development, and photomorphogenesis.
Pleitropic effect: increase in trichome branch number, which develop in clusters and have an increased amount of nuclear DNA.
Plieotrophic defects. Leaves may be lobed, downward curving or make ectopic meristems. The SAM is enlarged and phyllotaxy is abnormal and the shoot apex may terminate in a cluster of flowers with extra floral organs.Occasional homeotic conversion of petals to stamens.
Plieotrophic effects on plant development. Slow growth, defective hypocotyl elongation, abnormal flowers, reduced levels of sterols,membranes leaky.
Ploidy levels show an increased ratio of 32C cells compared to the wild type in dark-grown hypocotyls and an increase in levels of 16C cells in light-grown hypocotyl and cotyledon cells.
pmm-12 plants are phenotypically similar to wild type seedlings when grown at 16?18 ?C but die within several days after transfer to 28 ?C. This phenotype is observed throughout both vegetative and reproductive development. Protein extracts derived from pmm-12 plants have lower protein and enzyme activity levels, and, at restrictive temperature, glycosylation is perturbed.
pny phenotype
Pointed , narrow , and serrated leaves in the seedlings.
Pointed, narrow, and serrated leaves in the seedlings.  Delayed appearance of the first two foliage leaves.  Reduced growth rate of the primary root. Late flowering. Fasciation.
pollen development arrested after released from tetrads, free microspores were devoid of exine layer, completely absence of pollen grains at anther maturity, completely male sterile
Pollen development defective.
Pollen from heterozygotes can fertilize wild-type ovules.  Pollen tube growth and sperm delivery appear to be unaffected by the mutation.
Pollen grains are released as tetrads whereas wild-type grains are released as monads.
Pollen grains carrying cs9-5 are gametophytic lethal.No cs9-5 homozygotes could  be obtained from the self-pollination of cs9/+ heterozygotes. There was no observable difference in vegetative growth between the heterozygous mutant (cs9/+) and the wild-type plant.cs9/+ hetrozygotes exhibited precocious pollen germination inside the anthers. This phenotype was exacerbated by high humidity.
Pollen grains carrying cs9-6 are gametophytic lethal. No cs9-6 homozygotes could  be obtained from the self-pollination of cs9/+ heterozygotes. There was no observable difference in vegetative growth between the heterozygous mutant (cs9/+) and the wild-type plant.cs9/+ hetrozygotes exhibited precocious pollen germination inside the anthers. This phenotype was exacerbated by high humidity.
Pollen grains from mutant anthers showed less than 0.5% germination in vitro in pollen growth medium, compared with 7% germination for wild-type Ler pollen.
Pollen harvested from pip5k4 pip5k5 mutants germinates at a lower rate than wild type pollen, and pollen tube growth is slowed. However, the general shape of the pollen tubes is normal.
Pollen is defective in germination and pollen tube growth.  Abnormal callose deposition in pollen grains.
Pollen tube development from mutant homozygote pollen is affected, growth rate is reduced.
Pollen tube growth defects in vivo. Primary root and dark-grown hypocotyl growth inhibition, at least in part due to cell elongation defects, upon exogenous GABA exposure.
Pollen-tube growth in ntt mutants is essentially unaffected prior to entry into the ovary chamber. The first difference between the wild-type and ntt mutant  was observed 4 hr after pollination. Pollen tubes in wild-type had traveled a substantial distance into the transmitting tract, but in ntt mutants, tubes had only slightly penetrated the ovary chamber. In wild-type carpels, the first pollen tubes reach the  base of the ovary after 10 hr, whereas in ntt carpels, pollen tubes made little additional progress. Even after 48 hr, pollen tubes in the ntt mutant had penetrated only approximately a third of the way into the ovary chamber.
Pollen tube growth was altered. Pollen tubes were shorter, often having branched appearance and peculiar kinky shape. Also, callose plugs were rare or absent in mutant pollen tubes, compared to the wild type. Despite morphological aberrations, twisted pollen tube appeared to have same ultrastructural features as the wild type pollen tubes. Migration of the male germ unit to the pollen tube occurred at approximately the same time in mutants and in the wild type. Homozygous progeny showed shorter and thicker root hairs. No other significant visible phenotype changes were observed.
Pollen tube growth was altered. Pollen tubes were shorter, often having branched appearance and peculiar kinky shape. Also, callose plugs were rare or absent in mutant pollen tubes, compared to the wild type. Despite morphological aberrations, twisted pollen tube appeared to have same ultrastructural features as the wild type pollen tubes. Migration of the male germ unit to the pollen tube occurred at approximately the same time in mutants and in the wild type. Homozygous progeny showed shorter and thicker root hairs. Seed set and the silique size were reduced in kip-2 mutants. No other significant visible phenotype changes were observed.
Pollen tubes are short and pollen tube growth is slow.
Pollen tubes defective in ovule targeting.  Hap2 pollen are defective in fertilization.
Pollen tubes show severe growth defect.  Tubes are 'kinky,' short, and often thin.  Tubes grow only a short distance with nondirectional growth, often terminating prematurely with a bursting event.
Position of root-hair cells is scrambled.  Only 66% of epidermal cells (compared with 92% in wild type) overlying two cortical cells develop as root hairs, and 21% of epidermal cells overlying one cortical cell (compared with 1% in wild type) develop as root hairs.
Postembryonic growth of roots (primary and lateral) severely impaired.
Predominantly produces unbranched trichomes.
Premature seed dehydration and maturation at the distal ends of siliques.  At 13 and 14 days after fertilization, seeds at the distal end of siliques of mutant plants begin to dehydrate prematurely.  In addition, the distal ends of the siliques themselves dehydrate early.
Premature termination and loss of the shoot apical meristem. Failure to establish or maintain the root apical meristem.  Aberrant embryonic development.
premature transition from mitotic cycle to the endocycle; severe dwarfism with defective meristems.
Preopened stomata fail to close in response to ABA, consistent with the inability to reduce water loss upon drought.
Primary root and dark-grown hypocotyl growth inhibition, at least in part due to cell elongation defects, upon exogenous GABA exposure.
Primary root growth of the double mutant is strongly insensitive to decreased phosphate levels.The Pi depletion repression  of root growth phenotype is dependent upon the presence of nitrate (0.05mMNO3).
primary roots failed to penetrate a harder agar medium from a softer medium.
Primary roots of mutant plants were shorter than in the wild type, hairy and twisted along longitudinal axis. Organ twisting was noticeable in leaf and stem too, but not in cotyledons and hypocotyl. Inflorescence was twisted too, containing twisted and abnormally shaped flowers with reduced fertility. Initial divisions in the epidermal/lateral root cap initial are defective in mutant roots. Furthermore, lateral root cap cells develop in the epidermal position in trn1 roots. Apical dominance severely reduced.
Produced approximately twice as many juvenile leaves as Columbia, indicating that FRI-Sf2 FLC-Col delays the transition from juvenile to adult phase as well as flowering.
Produced leaf primordia.
Produced only monads (like wild-type).
Produces abaxialized leaves.
Produces approximately 80% unbranched and 20% two-branched trichomes.
Produces a significant number of three-branched trichomes. However, the branches may not always be of the correct size or shape, and one or more of the branches might be twisted, bent or shorter than their wild-type counterparts. The short stalk defect remains the same as in the zwi-3 single mutant.
produces diploid gametes by skipping the second meiotic division.
Produces less two-branched trichomes (~40%) than the frc single mutant.
Produces mostly two-branched trichomes.
Produces seeds.
Produces trichomes that have more branches than those of wild type (up to eight branches, compared to three or four in WT).
Production of the first pair of leaf primordia is significantly delayed compared to the wild type.  This likely reflects a defect in embryonic shoot meristem initiation.
Profound changes in early arising flowers. Both organ numbers and organ identity are affected in a highly variable manner.
Proline accumulation was higher in untreated ggt1-1 seedlings and also increased to a higher than wild-type level upon ABA treatment.
Prolonged plastochron.
prors1-like transcriptional response.
Protoplasts show increased sensitivity to ceramide induced cell death
Protuberances form on the surface of hypocotyls and petioles due to localized outgrowths of epidermal cells.
PSII is strongly photoinhibited and lipid peroxidation is enhanced in the double mutant.
Pst DC3000 strains grew better (infection) when inoculated on mutant rather than wildtype leaves.
pts-1 heterozygous mutants do not display any obvious phenotypic abnormalities in plant size, pigmentation, leaf development or flower development. However, they produce a 3:1 ratio of viable to deformed seed upon self-fertilization. The deformed seed turn pale white and then dark brown during the greening stage. The deformed seeds contain embryos arrested at the preglobular stage.
pts-2 heterozygous mutants do not display any obvious phenotypic abnormalities in plant size, pigmentation, leaf development or flower development. However, they produce a 3:1 ratio of viable to deformed seed upon self-fertilization. The deformed seed turn pale white and then dark brown during the greening stage. The deformed seeds contain embryos arrested at the preglobular stage.
Quadruple mutant displays defects in many aspects of development. Defects include:abnormal leaves, leaves are narrow and twisted; reduced number of axillary shoots and reduced fertility. In addition, mutants also display single or fused cotyldons, reduced number of lateral roots and are mildy agravitropic.
Quadruple mutant enhances bel1 phenotype.Integuments develop abnormally and after stage 12 the single integument like structure forms a leaf-like organ.
Quadruple mutant plants developed narrow leaves with ectopic blade outgrowth along the petioles, like bop1 bop2 leaves, as well as ectopic outgrowths on their abaxial lamina, like kan1 kan2 leaves. However, all of the bop1 bop2 kan1 kan2 leaves also showed extended, radialized petiole development that was not observed in either parental genotype.
Radicle and the shoot apical meristem (SAM) appeared normal in the homozygous seedlings but were often larger.
Rapidly accumulate anthocyanins due to the loss of root functionality.
Rapidly bleached and finally died if grown in darkness and exposed to white light.  No phenotype of kept under continuous white light right from the begining of germination.
Rduced shoot apical meristem size and thin inflorescence stems.
Reactive oxygen intermediate (ROI) production was stronger in A. brassicicola-infected mutant lines and always spread into uninoculated areas. The same response was observed upon infection with PtoDC3000. Moreover, ROI microbursts appeared in infected leaves before the appearance of microscopic lesions.
Reactive oxygen intermediates (ROI) accumulation was observed at most pathogen interaction sites.
recessive mutant, Leads to a moderately pale leaf phenotype. The cotyledons of these plants are green and indistinguishable from those of wild-type seedlings
Recessive mutants have early flowering phenotype. In long days (16 hours) flowers after about 10 leaves as compared to Col siblings which flower after 15 leaves. Truncates vegetative phase. Makes trichomes early.
recessive phenotype consisting of a 90% reduction in C8 glucosinolates. also reductions in the levels of C7 glucosinolates
Red light irradiation reduced the expression levels of two DELLA genes, GAI and RGA, by threefold to fourfold in this mutant.
Reduced, but still significant, number of branched trichomes.
Reduced ability to respond to cytokinin by callus or shoot formation.
Reduced abortion of triploid seeds. In the presence of adm-1 the seed abortion phenotype due to the jas-3 allele is reduced from 30% to 2%.
Reduced beta-limit dextrin debranching activity.
Reduced biomass. Plants are smaller due to defects in cell expansion. Root length is decreased. Slightly delayed flowering.
Reduced but still significant response to gravity. mag1 represses the phenotype of zig-1.Similar phenotype to mag-1 single mutant.
reduced camalexin synthesis in response to infection.
Reduced cambial activity and reduced secondary growth in both shoots and roots.
Reduced cell division  throughout development; increase in cell expansion compensates the reduction in cell division; light-grown plants exhibit a rotundifolia-like leaf shape (round leaves); dark-grown seedlings have short hypocotyls (because of a reduced number of elongated cells) and open hooks typical of light-irradiated seedlings; roots and cotyledons have the appearance of dark-grown wild type; reduced brassinolide responsiveness; stomatal opening is insensitive to inhibition by ABA, and the rate of water loss is greater than from wild type.
Reduced cell number and exclusive xylem differentiation within the root vasculature.
reduced chlorophyll levels. A transcript profiling  experiment revealed that a considerable proportion of genes downregulated in the loss-of-  function mutants are involved in carbon metabolism. More sensitive to exogenous glucose
Reduced conversion of &#946;-carotene into &#946;,&#946;-xanthophylls.
Reduced cytokinin-induced inhibition of adventitious root formation compared to wildtype.
reduced daylength sensitivity, early flowering in short days in comparison to Landsberg erecta or Columbia ecotypes
reduced dormancy; does not require GA; high capacity for dark germination; freshly harvested seeds will germinate; embryo determined (not a maternal effect).
reduced dormancy; does not require GA; high capacity for dark germination; reduced sensitivity to GA biosynthesis inhibitor, tetcyclacis; freshly harvested seeds will germinate; embryo determined (not a maternal effect).
Reduced down-regulaton of phosphate starvation induced gene expression when plants are treated with cytokinins. Reduced response to exogenous cytokinins.
reduced expression of atRZ-1a
Reduced expression of cold-responsive genes, increased freezing sensitivity
Reduced female fertile. No phenotype when grown in short days.
Reduced female fertile. Normal phenotype when grown under short/long days. When grown in the dark after 10 days early senescence followed by death.
Reduced female fertile in short days. In dark ,plants show early sensecence and die before wild type sibs.
Reduced female fertility.
Reduced fertility,abnormal leaf shape,reduced floral organ number, loss of apical dominance.
Reduced fertility, failure to transmit through pollen. Pollen development affected at the second mitotic division resulting in pollen with a single generative and vegetative cell. Pollen can germinate and fertilize the egg cell but embryos arrest. Unfertilized endosperm develops.
Reduced fertility, male sterile due to defects in tapetum development.
Reduced fertility, short siliques and aborted seeds. Late flowering. Reduced number of lateral roots.Short stamens.
Reduced fertility.
Reduced fertility. Early prophase I from leptotene through to pachytene was indistinguishable from wild type, but as the chromosomes desynapsed towards the end of prophase I and began to condense during late diplotene/diakinesis, a proportion of the homologous chromosome pairs lack chiasmata and are present as univalents at metaphase  I. This resulted in missegregation at the first meiotic division, leading to the   formation of dyads containing aberrant chromosome numbers. This in turn resulted in aneuploid tetrads following the second meiotic division.
Reduced fertility. Increased root length (longer roots). Hypersensitive to salt stress.
Reduced fertility.  Reduced silique length.  Reduced chiasma frequency.
Reduced fertility. Short siliques. Both gametophytes are affected. A large proportion of pollen is dead and most (ca. 80%) of embryo sacs are defective or degenerated. Meiosis is abnormal with fewer chiasmata formed.
Reduced fertility. Short siliques. Pollen and embryo sac abortion leading to reduced transmission through the male and female gametophytes.
Reduced fertility (70% fewer seeds), slower bolting (late flowering) and slower growing. Increased sensitivity to nitrogen and carbon deprivation.
Reduced fertility-50% of ovules abort.Antiopodal cells take on egg cell fate based upon ectopic expression of egg cell markers.
Reduced fertility due to defects in meiosis. Loss of centromeric cohesion prematurely in meiosis II, prior to metaphase leading to unbalanced segregation and formation of defective microspores. Also a partially penetrant meiosis I phenotype in which a small number of univalents are produced.
Reduced fertility due to male sterility. Pollen collapsed and outcompeted by wild type pollen. Phenotype apparent at microspore release stage II. Tapetum differentitation is abnormal which causes a sporophytic defect on microgametogenesis.
Reduced fertility due to premature loss of sister chromatid cohesion. pans1 mutants also have macroscopic growth defects. When grown under normal conditions pans1 produced smaller inflorescences than wt as measured 6 weeks after sowing.  pans1-1 showed a slightly shorter primary root.
Reduced fertility- siliques do not elongate. Flower phenotype resembles the lug-16 single mutant with narrow sepals and petals. A percentage are also embryo lethal.
Reduced fertility which probably results from the many reproductive defects observed: gynoecium may lack stigmatic papillae, may be curved or aberrantly-shaped; carpels may be partially or completely unfused.
Reduced filament elongation as well as thickening of the style.
reduced FLC mRNA, early flowering
Reduced fluorescent phenylpropanoid secondary metabolites, reduced lignin, collapsed vessel elements, dwarf
Reduced germination (80% of normal), slow initial growth, short roots.
Reduced germination rate. Increased dormancy.
reduced growth, 50% of the seeds are aborted at the embryo heart stage, the seed chloroplasts have reduced galactolipids, and that the galactolipids have reduced 18-carbon fatty acids, leaves accumulate trigalactosyldiacylglycerol, triacylglycerol and phosphatidate
Reduced growth, small dark green leaves. Small flowers with poorly developed stamens and short filaments. Male sterile.
Reduced growth; serrated leaves.
Reduced growth (decreased biomass) when grown under conditions with salt or osmotic stress. Reduced levels of H2O2.
reduced growth and aberrant leaf development.
reduced growth and pale green leaves compared with type when grown under low-light conditions (25-35umol/m2/s).
Reduced growth in short-day conditions. Higher levels of oxidative stress
Reduced growth of lateral roots.Delayed flowering in long and short days.
Reduced-growth phenotype.
Reduced growth rate, prolonged lifetime, bushy growth, pointed leaf, defective vascular patterns and pod development
Reduced growth rate.
reduced H3K27me1 in vivo; partial heterochromatin decondensation; transcriptional activation of repressed heterochromatic elements
Reduced hypocotyl and cell lengths. Lower polygalacturonase activity. Pectins extracted from the cell wall had larger average molecular masses. Relative amount of glucuronic acid is lower in etiolated seedlings. Floral organ patterning is affected, resulting in one or two extra petals.
reduced lateral root formation
Reduced leaf size. Leaf shape resembles that of spt16-1 single mutant. Earlier flowering than either single mutant.
Reduced leaf size and narrow laminae.
Reduced leaf size due to fewer cells,  but increase in total leaf number especially under short days. Reduced stature and decreased apical dominance. Reduced fertility/seed set.Early flowering.
Reduced length and width of leaves but overall form and heteroblasty is not altered.
Reduced levels of chloroplastic &#945;-amylase AMY3.
Reduced levels of cytokinin induced gene expression (AAR5-7).
Reduced levels of cytokinin inducible gene expression, specifically AAR5-7.
Reduced levels of GDP-Man.
Reduced levels of lutein.
Reduced Levels of Total BA and of  Benzoylated Glucosinolates
Reduced localized cell death compared to wild-type.
Reduced male fertility.
Reduced meristem size; abnormal phyllotaxy;variable floral organ number.
Reduced methylation at AtSN1 transposon site.
Reduced monovalent cation-dependent proton transport activity.  Vacuoles isolated from leaves had a much lower Na+/H+ exchange activity.  Altered leaf development, with a reduction in the frequency of large epidermal cells and a reduction in overally leaf area compared to wt plants.
Reduced nitric oxide synthase (NOS) production in leaves and root tips; impaired organ growth: yellowish first true leaves, reduced root and inflorescence growth, reduced fertility; defective abscisic acid- induced stomatal movements; kanamycin resistant
Reduced nitrogen content in embryos.
Reduced number of carpels relative to clv3 single mutant.
Reduced number of chiasmata.
Reduced number of lateral roots.
Reduced number of rosette leaves. Fewer inflorescence stalks. Reduced sucrose content in phloem.
Reduced number of rosette leaves. Plants grown in 10/14 hour light-dark cycle make between 14-27% fewer leaves. The diameter of the rosette is also reduced. Primary root length is also decreased as is the number of lateral roots.
Reduced number of trichomes, which are unbranched or single branched.
Reduced number of trichomes and abnormal trichomes. Pale seed coats. Smaller seeds.
Reduced number of trichomes on stems, leaves, sepals and lateral branches.
Reduced numbers of stamens and carpels suggesting a reduction in floral meristem size.
Reduced organ growth.  Reduced cell proliferation rate.
Reduced overall biomass, short plants, thin stems,short siliques, reduced male fertility due to defects in pollen cell wall biosynthesis. Reduced fatty acid and lipid content in pollen and cell walls.
Reduced paternal transmission of msi1 with respect to msi1-1/+ single heterozygote.  The interaction between the msi1 mutation and the fas1 mutation is synergistic.  Increase in number of arrested bicellular pollen and number of arrested microspores with respect to either single heterozygote.
Reduced photosynthetic properties including low chlorophyll content, reduced accumulation of thylakoid proteins and reduced rates of carbon fixaiton.
Reduced plant growth.  Lower rate of PSII activity and oxygen evolution.  Lower levels of PSII supercomplex accumulation and elevated levels of monomer and dimer building blocks in mutant plants compared with WT.
reduced plant growth under sulfate starvation condition.  reduced sulfate uptake.
Reduced plant size (rosette diameter of plant is ~80% of that of wild-type).
Reduced pollen levels than wild type Ler and filaments shorter than carpels.
Reduced PSI stability.
Reduced rate of growth and increased leaf chlorosis. Pale leaves with reduced levels of chlorophyll.
Reduced rate of mitochondrial RNA editing. 70% reduction of RNA editing of nad7-213.
Reduced rates of root elongation.  Root hairs are significantly shorter than wild-type root hairs.  Roots do not wave or skew on hard-agar surfaces.
Reduced resistance to Leptosphaeria maculans, causal agent of blackleg disease.
Reduced response to gravity but not as strong as zig-1 along. Zip3 suppresses zig-1 phenotype.
reduced root elongation under PEG-induced dehydration
Reduced root growth and foliar biomass. Total vitamin B6 levels were lower than in wild type, measured using yeast bioassay.
Reduced root growth at pH 4.7. Hypersensitive to proton (H+) and aluminum (Al3+) rhizotoxicity.  No expression of the AtALMT1 gene (encoding a malate transporter) and malate excretion after Al treatment.
reduced root hair density; increased trichome density.
Reduced root vascular population.  Roots lose bilateral symmetry and are monarch instead of diarch.
reduced rosette size and pale green leaves, remarkably low chlorophyll content per leaf area
Reduced RUB modification of CUL1.
Reduced SA accumulation in response to pathogens, reduced pathogenesis-related gene expression, and enhanced susceptibility  to pathogens.
Reduced seed coat mucilage. Irregularly shaped seed coat epidermal cells.
Reduced seed dormancy. Germination occurs in the light and in the absence of cold treatment.
Reduced seed dormancy phenotype.
Reduced seedling biomass and root length, earlier flowering and reduced seed yield when grown in soil.  In hydroponic growth, seedling growth and root elongation were inhibited the higher the Pi levels in the medium.  Under Pi deficiency, anthocyanin levels in the leaves were higher than wild type.
Reduced seedling size with small cotyledons, slightly shortened hypocotyls (65% of wildtype) and significantly reduced root length.
Reduced seed longevity.
Reduced seed set, a large percentage of defective female gametophyte observed during 8-nucleate stage. Male gametophyte was also affected, mostly at binuclear stage of pollen development. Mutant pollen grains were viable.
Reduced seed set, pollen defective
Reduced seed set.
Reduced seed set. Delayed embryo sac development results in defects in pollen tube guidance.
Reduced seed set. Embryo arrest at various points after the initial asymmetric division. Abmormal ovules include over proliferation of the chalazal endosperm. Reduced sensitivity to ABA during seed development and germination.
Reduced seed set. Indehiscent anthers.
Reduced seed set. Pollen tubes are delayed in germination/growth.
Reduced seed set and shortened siliques. Phenotype is identical to bt2-3/+;bt3-1/+
Reduced seed set due to delayed development of embryo sacs and resulting defect in pollen tube guidance.
Reduced seed size
Reduced sensitivity to constant red light during de-etiolation.  Have longer hypocotyls than Col siblings when grown in continuous red light for 4 days.  Reduced expansion of cotyledon area, slightly elongated petioles.
Reduced sensitivity to cytokinin in root growth assay (exogenous application of cytokinins inhibits wildtype root elongation).
Reduced sensitivity to victorin.
Reduced shoot gravitropism compared with wild-type Ler.
Reduced shoot meristem size.
Reduced silencing.
Reduced size and fertility under normal condition of growing.
reduced size of aerial organs, due to the retardation of growth by cell expansion rather than by cell proliferation; impaired nuclear endoreduplication and delayed chloroplast development in leaf cells.
Reduced size of aerial organs. Much shorter primary root length. Reduced numbers of cells in organs.
Reduced size of the mature plant. Thirty days after seed germination, the fresh weight of this mutant is one-fifth of that of wild type.
Reduced splicing efficiency of mitochondrial introns.
Reduced spreading of silencing, loss of endogenous 24 nt siRNAs.
Reduced starch in leaves
Reduced stature, bushy plants, reduced number of ovules, reduced fertility.  Homeotic conversion of floral organs such as carpeloid sepals and stamen like petals.Defects in ovule and embryo sac development.Reduced pollen.
Reduced stature, early flowering, and altered leaf morphology.
Reduced stature, pale green color and reduced number of secondary roots. Decreased catalase activity. Increased H2O2 and increased sensitivity to H2O2. Also, increased uptake of Li+, Na+ and norspermine. Decreased sensitivity to litium most likely due to decrease in sensitivity to ethylene.
Reduced stretch-activated mechanosensitive channel activity.
reduced sugar-induced expression of beta-Amylase and shows pleiotropic phenotypes such as early flowering; short day-sensitive growth; and seed germination that is hypersensitive to glucose and abscisic acid and resistant to mannose
reduced total N and carbon content and increased amino acid levels in mature and desiccated mutant seeds; elevated amino acid level in the seed coat/endosperm; increased number of protein bodies in the endosperm; decreased storage protein levels.
Reduced transmission of allele through pollen. Homozygotes cannot be recovered. Suspected embryo lethality of homozygotes because reduced seed set is observed in siliques of plants segregating homozygotes.Mature pollen grains appear WT, suggesting that defect occurs at a later stage. Vegetative development appears normal.
Reduced transmission through both male and female gametophytes. Mature pollen is similar to WT. Lower seed set than WT. Vegetative development is similar to WT.
Reduced transmission through female gametophyte. 50% of ovules show defects in central cell development. Central cells are reduced in size and nuclei are displaced. Post-fertilization, 50% of seeds abort early. In those aborted seeds the endosperm is morphologically abnormal.
Reduced transmission through gametophytes. In unfertilized  mutant ovules, the pollen tube continues to grow inside the female gametophyte and does not release sperm cells. In the male, loss of function results in premature rupture of the pollen tube.
Reduced transmission through male gametophyte at elevated temperatures. Seed set is normal at 18C, slightly decreased at 22C and plants are nearly sterile when grown at 30C. Mutant pollen tubes appear to be heat sensitive and rupture or grow very slowly at 30C. Seedlings grown at 37C were more sensitive to extreme temperatures than normal siblings.
Reduced transmission through pollen. Pollen grains are viable, but pollen germination is aberrant. Homozygotes cannot be recovered.
Reduced trichome branching
Reduced trichome numbers.Trichomes that do form have reduced (e.g. single) branch numbers.
Reduced XGA content is responsible for reduced xylose.
Reduction in AUX1 mRNA level.
reduction in AUX1 mRNA level observed in aux1-21 mutants is reversed in aux1-1 upf1- 5 double mutants.
Reduction in cellulosic glucose. The non-cellulosic matrix polysaccharides showed a reduction in fucose, increase in arabinose and to a lesser extent xylose. No significant changes in the levels of rhamnose, mannose and galactose are observed.
Reduction in chlorophyll a and b content (7% and 34%, respectively).
Reduction in Fe(III) chelate reductase activity under ion-deficiency conditions. By contrast, under ion-sufficient conditions, this activity for the mutant was reproducibly higher than that of wild type seedlings.
Reduction in free-sugar content (glucose, fructose and lactose).
Reduction in growth rate of the mutant plants compared with the wild type: the rate of increase in rosette diameter was slower, the average time for flowering increased by several days, and the fresh weight was lower.
reduction in Mo enzyme activities
Reduction in plant chilling and freezing tolerance
Reduction in post-transcriptional gene silencing.
Reduction in primary root length (about 5-fold compared to wildtype).
Reduction in root growth evident from seventh day after germination compared to wild type.  Reduced number of cortical cells in the root meristem.
Reduction in seed number.
Reduction in silique length.
Reduction in starch content. starch turnover  along a diurnal cycle was lower in mutant plants than in wild-type plants, with a clear reduction of both synthesis and degradation rates. Starch levels at the beginning of the light period were higher in the mutant than in the wild-type plants. However, the reduced rate of starch  synthesis in the mutant led to a lower starch level at the end of the illuminated period.
Reduction in the rosette biomass to 43 and 42% of fresh and dry weight of Col, respectively , and weak but significant (P < 0.001) inhibition of the root growth when the kinetic slopes of hub2-1 and Col were compared.
Reduction in total &beta;,&beta;-carotenoids and increase in total &beta;,&epsilon;-carotenoids.
Reduction of the width of  the stele measured at 100 &mu;m above the QC (where the early  differentiation of the phloem and the xylem starts in wildtype)  and reduction of the number of stele cell files visible on  median optical sections in the same region.
ref6-1 mutant seedlings do not have any obvious aberrant phenotypes under light-grown conditions, but they do have a late flowering phenotype. Adult plants have reduced cell elongation, manifested in a ~30% reduction in leaf petiole length as well as shorter leaf blades, but their leaf width is similar to wild-type. The transcript levels of some BR-regulated genes are reduced in ref6-1 mutants. H3K9me3 levels are elevated immediately upstream of the BR-responsive TCH4 gene in ref6-1 mutants.
ref6-1 mutants flower later than wild-type plants under long- and short-day conditions even though they have the same leaf initiation rate as wild-type plants. FLC mRNA levels are increased in ref6-1 mutants.
ref6-2 mutants flower later than wild-type plants.
ref6-3 mutants flower later than wild-type plants under long- and short-day conditions.  Levels of H4 histone acetylation in the the promoter and in the first intron of FLC are reduced in ref6-3 mutants compared to wild-type plants.
Relative decrease the effective quantum yield of PSII (&#934;II).
Relative to wild type, both the number of lateral roots (longer than 1cm) and the total length of the lateral roots are increased.
Repla exhibit stripes of narrow cells very  similar to those of the valve margin.
Requires a high level of B. When the B concentration in the medium was reduced to 3 microM, the expansion of rosette leaves was severely affected in bor1-1 but not in wild-type plants. In a medium containing 30 microM B the mutant grew normally but showed female sterility, whereas the wild type was able to set seeds. These defects of the bor1-1 mutant were not detected with supplementation of 100 microM B. In vivo concentrations of B in bor1-1 mutants were lower than those of the wild type, especially in the inflorescence stems.
Rescue of the nonflowering phenotype of ga1-3.
Resembles ag-4 flowers, but with some partial stamen-petal transformations.
Resembles seu-1 single mutant with reduced stamen number.
resemble wild-type plants that have been repeatedly treated with G.A.; long hypocotyls, erect rosette leaves, light green color, early flowering and parthenocarpy; seedlings defective in cotyledon number and phyllotaxy; stem elongation is increased caused primarily by an increase in the # of nodes; completely male sterile grown at 25C, partially sterile at 18C; ovaries often develop 3 or 4 carpels which contain structures appearing to develop from unfertilized ovules that may be additional carpels with stigmatic papillae; altered gibberellin signal transduction, resistant to the gibberellin (G.A.) biosynthesis inhibitor paclobutrazol.
resemble wild-type plants that have been repeatedly treated with G.A.; long hypocotyls, erect rosette leaves, light green color, early flowering and parthenocarpy; stem elongation is increased caused primarily by an increase in the number of nodes; partial male sterility (greatly reduced at 18C), altered gibberellin signal transduction and resistant to the gibberellin (G.A.) biosynthesis inhibitor paclobutrazol.
Resistant to 2,4-dichlorophenoxybutyric acid (2,4 DB), a compound that is metabolized to active auxin. When grown in the presence of pro-auxins, roots are shorter than normal.
resistant to auxin inhibition of root elongation; deficient in auxin-regulated growth processes including: reduced lateral root formation, reduced temperature-induced hypocotyl elongation, and a modest reduction in apical dominance.
Resistant to ciprofloxacin.  Normal chloroplast morphology in presence of the drug.
Resistant to cytokinin-induced hypocotyl shortening.
Resistant to cytokinin in root elongation assay and in callus growth and shoot formation assays.
Resistant to Erysiphe cichoracearum.
Resistant to exogenous ABA. Seeds contained lower amounts of endogenous ABA than wildtype.
Resistant to root elongation inhibition by IBA but responds normally to IAA.  Fails to respond to the stimulatory effects of IBA on lateral root initiation but makes lateral roots in response to IAA.  Specifically defective in IBA responses.  Has several peroxisome-defective phenotypes:  does not develop normally without exogenous sucrose, dramatic defects in hypocotyl and root elongation in the absence of sucrose. Shorter root and hypocotyl than WT.  Plants grown in soil have smaller rosettes, fewer rosette leaves, and shorter primary inflorescence stems than WT.  Also has shorter siliques containing fewer seeds than WT.  Pale green in color.
resistant to several  aminoglycoside antibiotics including kanamycin, streptomycin, gentamicin, amikacin,  tobramycin, and apramycin
Resistant to severe drought stress. Mutant plants recovered from water withdrawl to a greater extent than wild type.
Resistant to the GA biosynthesis inhibitor Paclobutrazol.
resistant to the inhibition of root elongation caused by 5 microM indole-3-butyric acid (IBA); fails to induce normal number of lateral roots when treated with 5 microM IBA; exhibits shorter hypocotyl than wt when grown in the dark without sucrose, but has a normal hypocotyl when grown in the dark with 0.5% sucrose; no visible phenotype in aerial morphology; defective in seed storage lipid utilization.
Responds to IAA, NAA, but not to 2,4-D.
Response to lower water potential results in an NADP/NADPH ratio that is altered (lower) with respect to wild type.  However, the NAD/NADH ratio remains the same.
Restoration of GUS activity of the transgene through inhibition of silencing.
Restoration of hygromycin resistance through release from gene silencing.
Restored PR1 expression to npr1 mutant (sni1 mutation in the npr1 bacground), and also mutant plantshad induced resistance to bacterium Psm ES4326 and oomycete pathogen Peronospora parasitica Noco-2; the resistance was similar to that of WT.
Retarded germination. Alterations in cotyledon shape and venation. Serrated rosette leaves with reduced area and petiole lenght. Reduced root length and number of secondary roots. Early flowering under short-day. Lost of apical dominance. Shorter siliques with fewer seeds.
retarded growth, reduced NPQ amplitude, limited electron transport rate
retarded growth, with thin leaves of a lighter yellowish-green color, and more roundly shape
retarded growth. deficiency in plant fructification (reduced fresh weight of fruits and reduced number of seeds per fruit).
Retarded root growth, variegated and distorted leaves, distorted flowers, partial sterile, and unviable seeds. Increased number but decreased size of mitochondria.
rgp1-1 mutants have significantly lower levels of UDP-L-arabinose mutase activity compared to wild-type plants and significantly lower levels of arabinose in their cell walls.
rgp2-2 mutants have significantly lower levels of UDP-L-arabinose mutase activity compared to wild-type plants and significantly lower levels of arabinose in their cell walls.
rif1-1 mutants are pale green with delayed leaf development. They have a strong resistance to fosmidomycin (FSM), an inhibitor of the isoprenoid biosynthetic enzyme DXR. The reduced rate of degradation of DXS and DXR in rif1-1 mutants leads to a higher accumulation of these two MEP biosynthetic enzymes. Though RIF1 was originally believed to be an NO-synthase, treatment with an NO donor, does not rescue the DXR over-accumulation phenotype, implying that this is not an NO-dependent phenotype. There is a reduction in the level of the large subunit of Rubisco, and two other plastid-encoded proteins in the rif1-1 mutant, however, levels of the plastid-encoded ClpP1 protease are elevated in rif1-1 mutants, compared to wild type seedlings. A plastid-targeted YqeH-GFP construct can rescue the growth, pigmentation, and FSM-resistance phenotypes of rif1-1. YqeH is a GTPase implicated in ribosomal biogenesis in bacteria.
rif1-2 mutants are pale green with delayed leaf development. They are resistant to fosmidomycin, an inhibitor of the isoprenoid biosynthetic enzyme DXR
rif1-3 mutants are pale green with delayed leaf development. They are resistant to fosmidomycin, an inhibitor of the isoprenoid biosynthetic enzyme DXP
RNA editing of the ndhD-2 site is impaired.  The codon for Ser-128 is not converted into one for Leu.
rnr2a-1 is actually an rnr2a-1 rnr2b-1  double mutant and is phenotypically wild-type
Root agravitropic phenotype.
Root cap cells appear as a mass lacking uniform morphology. Cells can be highly elongated and twisted.   Cells fail to stop elongation and to  adopt the rigid, rectangular morphology of COL cells.   When compared with smb-3, the triple mutant has thesame number of complete LRC layers, and the appearance of the cells in those layers closely resembles that in smb-3. However, partial remains of older LRC layers remain attached to the meristem in the triple mutant, giving it a messy appearance. Remains of old LRC cap layers can be  found still attached to the root along its whole length.
Root cortical cells and epidermal hypocotyl cells of the mutant are indistinguishable from the wild type under normal growth conditions.
Root cross-sections are identical to those of wildtype: observed re-appearance of a bipolar xylem strand and phloem tissue on each side.
Root elongation is indistinguisable from that of wildtype.
Root elongation markedly reduced in the presence of kinetin.
Root elongation not severely inhibited by cytokinins.
Root elongation shows greater sensitivity to brassinolide than wild-type. Root growth is slightly more sensitive to IAA in light-grown conditions than wild-type.
Root elongation unaffected.
Root growth at neutral and acidic pH on synthetic medium impaired.
Root growth inhibition by ABA on ein2-5 seedlings increased when the concentrations of ABA were elevated. At the ABA concentrations (0.1-0.25 &#956;M) which stimulate root growth of wild-type plants, root inhibition of the ein2-5  plants started to be observed, and the most profound inhibitory effect was observed at 0.25 &#956;M and higher concentrations of ABA.
Root growth significantly diminished.
Root growth significantly reduced (about two-third of that of wildtype) when grown in white light.
Root hair growth is not suppressed by phosphate.
Root hairs are very regular but significantly shorter than in the wild type.
Root hairs are very regular but significantly shorter than in the wild type.  Develops two different types of root hair structures: relatively short stumps with a clearly wider diameter than wt hairs and longer hair structures which are wider in the lower half of the root hair proper while the upper half is wt like.
Root hairs display very short stumps or collapsed root hairs.  Root hairs are often wavy, with an irregular hair diameter.  Sometimes develop bulbous structures at the root hair base.
Root hairs display very short stumps or collapsed root hairs.  Root hairs have an irregular hair diameter or are collapsed.
Root hairs form in a regular pattern.  Length of the hair proper is not affected but side branches develop from the enlarged bases.
Root hairs have mostly very short root hairs, indicating a defect in the transition to rapid tip growth, which is required to fully develop the hair structure.
Root length defect was restored when mutant was grown on 10mM galactose.
Root length similar to that of wildtype.
Rootless.Embryonic root differentiates 3 days after germination. Adventitious roots arrest 6 days after germination.
Roots and leaves of  the homozygous mutants were significantly shorter and smaller  than wild-type. Root tips of 7-day-old mutant seedlings  grown on MS medium with 1% sucrose had a shortened apical  meristem and, cells were more compact, in keeping with noticeably  shorter roots. When grown in soil, mutant  plants were dwarf with small yellowish leaves.
Roots are extremely curled.   Dark-grown seedlings are hypersensitive to ethylene. Extreme hypocotyl shortening is observed when grown on 100ul /L ethylene.
Roots are longer than WT.
Roots moderately resistant to elongation inhibition by 2,4-DB (2,4-Dichlorophenoxybutyric acid) but remained sensitive to inhibition by 2,4-D (2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid). Fewer lateral roots are produced without induction which becomes more pronounced in response to IBA (Indole-3-butyric acid) treatment.
Roots of the ein2-5 mutant seedlings showed enhanced sensitivity, although to a lesser extent, to salt and mannitol compared with the wild-type seedlings over the same period. Roots of ein2-5 seedlings were longer than those of the wild type in the absence of salt and osmotic stress condition.
Roots of the mutant contained ~20-fold the amount of chlorophyll of the wild type.
Roots of the mutants are similar to those of wild type when grown at 21?C. After transfer to 31?C, their roots progressively increase in diameter between day s 5 and 9. Extended treatment at this temperature leads to the drastic reduction in root elongation and of the elongation zone itself.
Roots of wild-type and mutant plants were similar in spite of a moderate (14%) reduction in the main root length of plantlets grown on plates.
Roots of wild-type plants turn green when grown under light conditions.  The roots of wildtype plants were green, whereas those of the mutants remained white after having been  cultured for 30 days under light. The chlorophyll content in roots of the wild-type plant (Ws) was 1.1 &#956;g of chlorophyll/gram of fresh roots. Chlorophyll was not detected in roots of hy5-1 or hy5-Ks50.
Roots shorter than that of wildtype.
Roots show reduced expression of quiescent center markers and accumulation of starch grains in columella stem cells.
Roots were smaller than in wild-type plants.  However, no significant phenotype in roots of mutants maintained on sucrose-supplemented medium was observed.
Rosette diameter reduced ~15% compared to wild-type.
Rosette leaves are indistinguishable from wild type.
Rosette leaves are lobed and curled downwards and have shorter petioles.  Both the cauline leaves and sepals show serrations at margins.
Rosette leaves are severely reduced in size compared to wild type.
Rosette leaves are slightly chlorotic.
Rosette leaves are somewhat epinatic albeit less so than those of msg1-2.
Rosettes of 21 day old plants are smaller in size, when grown in control conditions or under constant Fe supplement: mutant leaves, in both conditions, are signi&#64257;cantly shorter and lighter than wt ones.
Round, shorter leaves. Defect in transition from juvenile to adult leaf shape.
Rounded shorter leaves. Defect in transition from juvenile to adult leaf shape.
Round-shaped chloroplasts in mesophyll cells of mutant (lens-shaped in wildtype).
rsf1 mutants accumulated slightly, but significantly lower, levels of anthocyanins than the wild type.
s1p-3 mutants exhibit a greater inhibition of primary root elongation in response to NaCl, KCl, LiCl, and mannitol than wild-type seedlings. The salt-sensitive phenotype co-segregates with the s1p-3 T-DNA insertion, and can be partially rescued by a 35S:S1P construct. s1p-3 mutants do not show the proteolytic processing of a 4xMyc:bZIP17 protein from an 84 kD to a 46-kD protein, as observed in wild type seedlings. In addition, several salt-responsive transcripts have more than a 2.5-fold lower transcriptional response in s1p-3 mutants than in wild type seedlings.
Sac51-d mutation reverses the dwarf phenotype caused by a loss-of-function in ACL5 gene encoding spermine synthase.
SA-induced expression of WRKY70 was completely  blocked in the insertion mutants. Mutants did not exhibit morphological differences  from the wild-type. Enhanced JA-induced accumulation  of anthocyanins. Enhanced disease susceptibility to bacterial and fungal pathogens. Enhanced susceptibility to Psm ES4326 infection.
SALK_079342 (nadk3) is hypersensitive to oxidative stress, ABA and osmotic stress.
SALK_126784 (dsp4) mutant plants accumulate leaf starch to significantly higher levels than the wild-type.  The dsp4 plants are smaller and their flowering was slightly delayed compared to the wild-type.
Salt sensitive. Hemizygotes are sensitive to growth in the presence of 150 mM NaCl. Only survived 5 days when grown on this medium.
Same as bnq3 single mutants: sepals and carpels  are  pale yellow or white,while the inflorescence stems and siliques are purple
Same as lut5-1 but weaker allele.
same as smb-3 single mutant
Same as smb-3 single mutant phenotype
Same degree of telomere shortening as in the pot1 ku70 and ku70 tert double mutants.
Same flowering time as wild-type plants.
Same NPQ induction phenotype as wild-type possibly due to genetic redundancy. AtBest2 is lowly expressed, Best1 and 2 have redundant function.
Same number of branch points as in trichomes of gl-3 single mutant.
Same number of leaves as wildtype but flowers seven days later.
Same number of leaves as wildtype but flowers three days later.
Same phenotype as acl5-1.
Same phenotype as ag-1 single mutants with completely normal petals developing in the second whorl. In addition, sepal number was normal in these flowers and no cases of sepal fusion were observed.
Same phenotype as atisa3-2.
Same phenotype as atlda-2.
Same phenotype as atrbohF-F3.
Same phenotype as bak1-1.
Same phenotype as cts-1.
Same phenotype as ggt1-1.
Same phenotype as that of single mutant acd11.
Same phenotype as wol-1.
Same phenotypes as the single mutants.
sca1-1 mutant exhibits a general reduction in size, which translates into rosettes with signicantly reduced projected area when compared with its wild type, Landsberg erecta (Ler). Mutants have significantly lower levels of chlorophyll a and chlorophyll b. Mesophyll defects include large intercellular spaces and a distribution of cell sizes wider than in the wild type.
Secondary walls of valve margins do not form and those of the enB layer form late. Lack of secondary walls mean causes siliques to be indehiscent.
Seed and embryo smaller in size, however the embryo cell size was comparable to control embryos. Precocious cellularization of the endosperm was observed.
Seed germination in the dark after far red light treatment was almost completely suppressed as in the case of wild type.
Seed germination shows increased sensitivity to ABA, NaCl, and mannitol.
Seed germination shows increased sensitivity  to ABA, NaCl, and mannitol.
Seed germination similar to wildtype in both dark and light conditions.
Seedling growth, including cotyledon greening and expansion, was more sensitive to osmotic stress conditions. Severe inhibition in seedling growth was observed when NaCl and mannitol concentrations were 150 mM and 400 mM or higher, respectively. The cotyledons of the germinated ein2-5 seedlings did not expand and were yellow in the presence of 150 mM NaCl and 400 mM mannitol by 10 days after stratification under light.
Seedling growth inhibition by ABA was substantially reduced in the mutant compared with that of the wild type. In the absence of  ABA, the mutant seedlings developed normally  and were indistinguishable from the wild-type  seedlings.
seedling growth were arrested which can be rescues by sucrose however not to the wild type growth level, marked retention of oil bodies in hypocotyls 5 day after germination
Seedling lethal, pale yellow plants die at a variety of seedling stages.
seedling lethal; cytokinesis abnormal.
Seedling lethal.
Seedling-lethal.
Seedling lethal. Albino. Accumulates 3% of WT Chl levels.
Seedling lethal.Mutants have disorganized roots.
Seedling lethal at 22 and 28C.
Seedling lethal at 22C. Viable at 28C.
Seedling lethal on soil but could produce a few rosette leaves on 1% sucrose media. No starch accumulation at the end of the diurnal cycle.  Can grow heterotrophically but is sensitive to light.
Seedling lethal phenotype of axr6-2 suppressed in the double mutant. Weak auxin response phenotype is similar to eta2-1 single mutant. Partial suppression of dwarf phenotype associated with eta2-1 single mutant.
Seedling lethal when grown on soil, but produced albino leaves or even inflorescent tissues on synthetic media supplemented with sucrose.
Seedling primary roots are short, agravitropic and the RAM is reduced in size. Shoot defects include delayed leaf initiation,bushy inflorescence, and sectoring. In the root, there is increased cell death and abnormal pattering.
Seedlings appear normal.
Seedlings are chlorotic,  consistent with iron starvation, are smaller than their wildtype  counterparts, and die 2 to 3 weeks post-germination.  Watering with supplemental iron overcomes lethality.  Roots contain less iron than wt.
Seedlings are more tolerant to high concentrations of glucose and sucrose compared to wild-type seedlings.
Seedlings consistently show retarded root growth when grown in full- or one-half-strength MS nutrients and are hypersensitive, as assayed by a root elongation assay, to Na+, K+, Zn2+ and Cu2+.
Seedlings exhibit root swelling when grown in the presence of 100 nM oryzalin and have a 25% reduction in hypocotyl length. Reduced cell size is due to defects in the microtubules. Microtubules in the root elongation zone remain disorganized. Also affects epidermal cells which have abnormal division planes.
Seedlings germination is totally arrested (both aerial parts and roots) when grown on 50 microM Cu.
Seedlings green normally when exposed to 4 hour light cycle. Plants still produce ROS and chloroplasts look abnormal but do not degrade.
Seedlings grown in artificial media supplemented with sucrose are able to produce a few irregularly shaped leaves, followed by an arrest in growth. The timing of growth arrest varies from one seedling to the next leading to a variety of sizes and morphologies.
Seedlings grown in the dark on sirtinol show long hypocotyls but no apical hook, have primary roots and are resistant to IAA and 2,4-D.  In the dark, hypocotyls but not roots are resistant to 2,4-D.  There is no obvious difference between wt and mutants grown on 2,4-D in the light.
Seedlings grown on 30 &#956;M Cu display yellow cotyledons, with completely arrested root growth.
Seedlings grown under far-red (but not red) light have elongated hypocotyls and resistance to FR-induced killing compared to wild-type seedlings.
seedlings have enlarged shoot apical meristem; embryos have extra cell tiers due to abnormal cell divisions of the basal cell derivatives.
Seedlings have green leaves and well-developed  roots when grown on MS medium [mineral salts and sucrose, 3% (w/v), solidified with agar, 0.6% (w/v)] supplemented with 50uM methyl jasmonate.
Seedlings have longer hypocotyls and closed cotyledons when grown in the dark on a medium without Brz220.
Seedlings have purple cotyledons.
Seedlings have shorter primary roots and increased numbers of lateral roots compared to Nossen wild type.  Adults were indistinguishable from wild type in terms of shoot length and secondary inflorescence formation.  Hypocotyl and root IBA basipetal transport are decreased.  Root acropetal IBA transport is increased.
Seedlings homozygous for the T-DNA insertion completely lacked expression of DAYSLEEPER. Mutant seedlings grew very slowly, and showed no expansion of the cotyledons or development of normal leaves or floral organs. The root remained short and had an excess of abnormal root hairs. The main and lateral root meristems appeared to have a normal organization when young, but as they matured became increasingly disorganized. After prolonged growth on plates, a few seedlings (1%) produced some photosynthetic tissue.
Seedlings of KO lines exhibited greener and larger cotyledons under light grown condition, but without change in hypocotyl growth. Phenotypes of seedling growth in the KO lines resembled the typical physiological responses regulated by photoreceptors such as chloroplast accumulation in cotyledons.However, seed germination rate of the KO lines was similar to that of wild-type under light grown conditions.
Seedlings of tpst-1 had stunted roots and smaller cotyledons compared with the WT.  tpst-1 has an abnormally shaped root apical meristem due to disorganized cell division and expansion. At 15 days after germination, the leaves of the tpst-1 plants are small and pale green, the number of higher order veins is reduced, and the secondary veins often do not close.  At the flowering stage, tpst-1 has smaller rosettes, tiny leaves showing early senescence, shorter inflorescence, and a reduced number of flowers and siliques. The fertility and seed set of tpst-1 are normal.
seedlings require sucrose supplementation to grow, are resistant to 2,4-DB; seedlings contained more seed lipid reserves than wild type.
seedlings stopped growing after initial expansion of the cotyledons, which then bleached within 2 weeks. Can be rescued by supplementing the growth medium with L-galactose or ascorbate.
Seed production and fertility are similar to those of wild-type.
Seeds, seedlings and whole homozygous plants do not show any visible phenotypic differences compared to wild type; not lethal. Analysis of the seed amino acid content show no significant Threonine (Thr)  increase compared to wild type; Thr and Ile content in plants is not significantly different from the wild type; reduced levels of organic acids and sugars, citrate and isocitrate levels in seeds and flowers are significantly lower than in wild type.
Seeds are misshapen and shriveled at maturity. Embryos are smaller than wild type and do not fill the seed.Embryos fail to elongate and remain adhered to the endosperm. Germinated plants exhibit defects in the cuticle. During germination must be maintained in a humid environment. The epidermal surfaces of cotyledons exhibit tearing.
Seeds are more tolerant of osmotic stress at germination than wild type seedlings.
Seeds develop only in the apical part of the fruit and are larger than those of wild type.
Seed set is greatly reduced in parvus plants  and most siliques either fail to develop or contain few (3-10) seeds.
Seeds failed to germinate in the dark and only 5% germinate in light conditions.
Seeds from the homozygous mutant plants were golden yellow in comparison to wild-type or heterozygous plants that were dark brown for  newly matured seeds.
Seeds have a reduced dormancy.
Seeds unable to germinate without application of exogenous GA.
Segregates 1:1 wild type, heterozygotes doe to defects in pollen tube development. Tubes are short and rarely find the ovule.
Segregates 25% aborted embryos.
Segregates 25% embryo lethal.
Segregates 25% embryo lethal. Leaves abnormally shaped (serrated).
Segregates 25% embryo lethal (globular arrest).
Segregates 3:1 WT:hoomozygous mutant. Homozygotes are white and arrest after the cotyledon stage. The phenotype is rescued by growth on sucrose.
Segregates about 17% embryo lethal. Embryos about around the transition stage.
Segregates ca. 25% embryo lethal. Aborted embryos fail to make proper first asymmetric division of the zygote. Endosperm is also abnormal.
Segregates embryo lethal phenotype (globular arrest) and reduced seed set.
Segregates embryo lethals that arrest at early stages of embryogenesis. Also defective transmission through male and female gametophytes.
Segregates embryo lethal that arrests at early stages of embryogenesis.
Segregates for 25% aborted embryos. Arrested seeds have elongated embryos that fail to divide and an endosperm containing only 2-6 nuclei.
Segregates for embryo lethal (3wt:1emb). Homozygotes are not viable.
Segregates for embryo lethal phenotype- 25% of embryos abort during globular stage.Arrested embryos have a raspberry like phenotype.
Segregating populations will show occasional reversion (ca. 40% in some lines)-otherwise segregates 3:1 wt:mutant. Reduced leaf venation, serrated leaves, reduced stature, narrow organs, reduced fertility. Reduced cell numbers, but cells have increased size.
selfed hemizygous plants did not produce homozygous progeny, suggesting the knock-outs are embryo lethal or unable to germinate.
self-fertilization of this atptb1-1(+/-) atptb2-1(-/-) double mutant   did not produce any double-homozygous progeny; in crosses of its pollen to wild type females, no atptb1-1(+/-) atptb2-1(+/-) genotype was produced; pollen grains germinated less efficiently than those from wild type plants
semidominant; aberrant cycling pattern of the cab2::luc reporter; shortens the period of two distinct circadian bioluminescence rhythms, the expression of chlorophyll a/b-binding protein (CAB) genes and the movements of primary leaves; seedlings grown in light or dark and mature light-grown plants are indistinguishable from the 2CAC transgenic parent (CS3755).
semidwarf
semi-dwarf; enhanced sensitivity to salt, ABA and oxidative stress; reduced electron transport through Complex III (cytochrome c reductase).
Semi-dwarf and wavy leaf phenotype, due to the elongation of the stem internodes and leaves. Initially, mutant seedlings were indistinguishable from wild-type under continuous light conditions, but as they grow the mutant plants develop short rosette leaves with severely wavy leaf blades. Mutant plants begin flowering several days later than wild-type plants during the reproductive stages of growth. They also display more rosette leaves than wild-type plants and show reduced growth of the inflorescence stems. The height of the mature ssm plants measures approximately one-quarter of that of the wild type. In contrast to these distinct phenotypes, however, the morphology of the flower organs and the fertility levels are unaffected in ssm plants. Histological analyses revealed that the length of the epidermal cells in the inflorescence stems of ssm plants was shorter that wild type but that the ssm mutation has little or no effect on the lengths of the pith parenchyma cells. Furthermore, the length of the parenchyma cells around the midribs of the rosette leaf petioles is clearly reduced in ssm mutants, whereas the mesophyll cell size in the rosette leaf blades is unaffected.
Semi-dwarf phenotype.
Semi-fertile dwarf.
Semi-sterile, reduced fertility. Progress through prophase I , meiosisI is delayed.
Sensitive to AAL-toxin
sensitive to abscisic acid (ABA)
Sensitive to DNA damaging agent (0.2 mg.l MMS); mutant roots were half of that on control medium without MMC.
Sensitive to gamma-irradiation and UV.
sensitive to methylmethanesulfonate and  cis-platin and showed an enhanced homologous recombination level
Sensitive to mitomycin C.  Intrachromosomal homologous recombination is reduced in the mutant plants and less inducible by genotoxic stress.
Sensitive to osmotic and salt stress. Slower growing roots.
Sensitive to osmotic stress. Plants have reduced germination when grown on 4% mannitol or sorbitol. Germination is reduced to 12% when grown on 7% sorbitol.
Sensitive to oxidative stress and heat shock with lower chlorophyll content and higher electrolytic leakage compared to wild type also abnormal growth and development.
sensitive to ozone (O3)
Sensitivity to FRc also was reduced in the mutant with respect to the wild type.
sepals and carpels  are  pale yellow or white,while the inflorescence stems and siliques are purple. Floral organs are smaller than WT. Flowers, cauline leaves, stems, and  siliques have a decreased amount of chlorophyll as compared to WT.
septum reduced, transmitting tract absent, carpels unfused at apex, shorter wider silique, reduced seed set
septum reduced, transmitting tract reduced, carpels sometimes unfused at apex, shorter wider silique, reduced seed set, weaker than spt-2, spt-3
sequence-indexed T-DNA insertion line generated by vacuum infiltration of Columbia (Col) plants with Agrobacterium tumefaciens vector pROK2; kanamycin was employed for selection of plants carrying a T-DNA (please note that in many lines, the kan resistance trait has been cosuppressed, so that insertion plants may not be kanamycin resistant); each T1 transformant has been maintained individually at SALK; the DNA sequence of each T-DNA flanking region was generated from seedlings grown from the same sample of seeds as that provided for distribution (T3).
Serrated petals and sepals.  Fertility is 40% that of wildtype.
Several GA biosynthesis genes are upregulated in the mutant compared to wild type during seed development.
severe albino phenotype; inhibited in chloroplast development; reduced expression of class I chloroplast encoded genes.
Severe allele: extremely small with major above-ground organs reduced in size and dark-green in color. Rarely produce seeds.
severe chlorotic phenotype after heat stress but indistinguishable from the wild type under optimal growth conditions.
Severe decrease in levels of bioactive GA4.
Severe defect in root length.
Severe defects in pollen tube guidance and growth and reduced fertility. Decreased responsiveness to pollen tube attractant LURE1.2.
Severe dwarf, small leaves
/nand short roots and does not flower in double mutant.
Severe dwarf with misshapen morphology.
Severe growth retardation.  Pleiotropic alterations in the inflorescence stem and leaf morphologies and floral structure.  Fasciated inflorescence stem with disrupted radial vascular patterning, apical meristem enlargement.  Number of flowers is increased with respect to wild type, carpels are very short and sterile.
severely attenuated chloroplast movement, similar phenotype to pmi1-2.
Severely collapsed vessels and stunted plant growth.
Severely disrupted meiosis.
Severely dwarfed, with twisted and malformed organs, and sterile. However, cotyledon shape and symmetry were unchanged. The leaf lamina area was slightly, but significantly, reduced in mutatnt plants. The length of the first and second leaves was slightly reduced too. The leaf venation network had a severely reduced complexity: incomplete loops, no tertiary or quaternary veins, and vascular islands. Rosette leaf size and shape were severely affected. Mutant leaves had a rumpled surface with asymmetric laminas because of non-developed blade parts.
Severely dwarfed with globular shape and curly, succulent leaves.
severely impaired in growth and barely germinated on growth  medium or in soil; the mutants had deformed cotyledons and  were not able to form roots at all.
severely impaired in jasmonate biosynthesis, produced fewer seed-containing siliques and fewer viable seeds. JA level did not increase significantly in response to wounding, more susceptible to the leaf-chewing insect Trichoplusia ni.
Severely reduced germination in about 25% of seeds (presumptive homozygotes). Homozygotes when recovered are slow growing with abnormal flowers and siliques and are generally not fertile.
severely reduced silique length and seed yield
Severely stunted and infertile.
severe primary root abnormalities; premature termination of primary root growth; substantially reduced sensitivity to cytokinin in the hypocotyl growth response assay; smaller rosette diameter; altered chlorophyll and anthocyanin production.
Severity of the phenotype varied between individual mutant seed. In the most severely affected seed, no embryo development could be detected. In such seeds the endosperm develops and cellularizes but fails to differentiate a complete peripheral (aleurone-like) surface layer. In less severe mutant seed, embryos develop to the globular stage before developmental arrest. In these embryos the plane of cell division is frequently uncontrolled compared to wild-type, the embryo proper is irregular, lacking a well defined L1 cell layer. In mutant seed developing an embryo, the endosperm completes the cellularization process and differentiates an aleurone- like layer in the micropylar chamber around the embryo, but this differentiation frequently stops towards the central chamber Wild-type development occurs in about 75% of seeds of the siliques from which mutant seeds were harvested.
SGT activity in the extracts from mature mutant leaf tissues was less than 5% of that of the wild type.
Shade avoidance phenotype (long stem) under high red:far-red ratios (i.e. in the absence of a shade signal).
shb1 mutant shows a mild phenotype of small seed and has no obvious phenotype of adult plant. shb1 also has a short hypocotyl under blue light and a late flowering phenotype under both long and short days.
Shifts single-channel amplitude peak from 10pa(WT) to 19.9pa.
Shifts single-channel amplitude peak from 10pa (WT) to 7.3pa
shmt1-2 plants died without producing progeny under the growth conditions used in this study.
Shoot and root growth is strongly retarded when plants are grown in the absence of Mn.  Also shows delayed growth when grown in the absence of Ca.
Shoot and root growth is very slow and leaf number is decreased compared to wildtype.
Shoot apex arrests prematurely in less than 50% of double mutants. This occurs around 2 weeks post germination or after 8 or so sets of leaves are made. The meristems are reduced in size. After growth resumption new, abnormally shaped leaves are produced and the plants eventually flower.
shoot apical meristem arrest
Shoot apical meristem terminates prematurely.
Shoot apical meristem terminates prematurely. The embryonic SAM appears normal during embryogenesis but after germination it begins to show signs of disorganization and decreasing size.
Shoot defects include: smaller leaves, decreased cell number in leaves, mesophyll and vascular patterning disorganized, cup-shaped cotyledons.Root defects: small cells at apex, columella cell layers reduced to 2, deformed root cap.
Shoot development indistinguishable from that of wild-type.
shoot FW, root length and chlorophyll contents of ko-1 plants are significantly lower than those of wild-type plants
shoot FW, root length and chlorophyll contents of ko-2 plants are significantly lower than those of wild-type plants
Shoot growth reduced, narrow and serrated leaves, flowers with more petals, some being fused. Severity of the phenotype became stronger in successive generations. 
/nPlants are completely sterile from 4th-5th generation.
Shoot growth reduced, narrow and serrated leaves, flowers with more petals, some being fused.  Severity of the phenotype becomes stronger after 4 generations, e.g. small deformed leaves associated with strong sterility.
Shoot growth reduced, narrow and serrated leaves,  Severity of the phenotype became stronger in successive generations. Plants are completely sterile from 4th-5th generation.
short, darkgrown hypocotyls, reduced cell adhesion and a dwarfed mature plant
short, darkgrown hypocotyls, reduced cell adhesion and a dwarfed mature plant. 50% reduction in HG (homogalacturonan) content
Short, wide burst hairs
Short and thin aerial parts.
Short bushy plants.  Reduced fertility-ovule number reduced by 80%
Short circadian period both in constant darkness and constant light. Leaf movement rhythms are shortened in constant light. Long hypocotyl in red light, but short hypocotyl in white or blue light. Hypersensitive to red light.
shortened petioles, shortened hypocotyl under various sub-saturating light conditions, delayed flowering time under both long-day and short-day conditions
Shortened primary root (~30% compared to wild type). Shortening is more pronounced 6d after germination. Phenotype results from a reduction in cell elongation.
Shortened roots.
shorter and wider root hairs compared with the wild type.
Shorter anther filaments, delayed anther dehiscence and greatly reduced male fertility.
Shorter delay in flowering time under LD conditions compared to single mutant fca-9.
shorter hypocotyl length when grown in the dark on regular medium or medium containing the BR biosynthetic inhibitor brassinazole (BRZ).  reduced responses to BL in hypocotyl elongation, root inhibition, and expression of the BZR1 target gene DWF4 and the BES1 target gene SAUR-Ac.
Shorter hypocotyls and roots compared to their wild type siblings in darkness.  In the light, plants have shorter hypocotyls and smaller cotyledons compared with the wild type, and there was inhibition of root elongation.  There is also a reduction in the number of 32C cells in 3 day old seedling hypocotyl cells.
Shorter hypocotyls in the dark, shorter  roots, smaller flowers, a decreased number of root hairs in response to jasmonic acid treatment, and altered light and auxin  responses.
Shorter hypocotyls in the light and dark.  Light-grown cotyledons are smaller than wild type.
Shorter hypocotyls than either single mutant
Shorter hypocotyls than wild-type when grown in white light but increase in length when grown in darkness (~25%) and red- and far-red-light.
shorter hypocotyl under Rc, FRc, Bc, and larger cotyledon area than wt/increased anthocyanin accumulation under FRc and Bc.
Shorter primary roots with respect to the wild type.
Shorter root than wildtype plant.
shorter visible lateral roots at 9 days after germination. The proximal region of each lateral root in the mutant is significantly swollen and often bent. Growth and morphology of the primary root of the puchi mutant is normal.
shorter visible lateral roots at 9 days after germination.  The proximal region of each lateral root in the mutant is significantly swollen and often bent.  Growth and morphology of the primary root of the puchi mutant is normal.
Short fruits, low fertility (about 13% of wild type seed set).
Short hypocotyl and open cotyledons, undergoing a partial deetiolation.
Short hypocotyls when grown in dark conditions.
Short hypocotyls when grown in white light. Slow growth,delayed flowering in long days. Increased organ size due to increased cell expansion.
Short internodes, abnormal phyllotaxy, misshapen floral organs, variable floral organ numbers, gynoecium lacks valve tissue, , abnormally positioned ovules. Resembles kanadi homozygous mutants.
Short leaves. Both petiole and blade are shortened and blade is more rounded. Reduced cell proliferation along the leaf margins.
Short photoperiod both in constant darkness and constant light. Short photoperiod is more severe in darkness than in light. Delayed greening of shoot tissues. Long hypocotyl in red light, but short hypocotyl in white or blue light. Hypersensitive to red light.
Short primary root, further reduced columella differentiation, and severely disrupted cell organization in the root tip compared with wild type; not significantly more sensitive to cantharidin than Col-0.
Short primary roots, reduced shoot size.
Short primary roots.
Short root hairs. 50% reduction in root hair length compared to wild type.
Short-root phenotype, characterized by short primary root and more branched root system.
Short root phenotype.
Short roots, disorganized root apical meristem. Root cap protoderm initial cells are abnormal as are quiescent center and columella cells.Late flowering.
Short roots. Initial development is normal but by 7 days post germination organization of the root apex begins to show abnormalities.
Short roots and hypocotyl. Reduced root apical meristem. Short root due to reduced number of cells and cell elongation defects.Increased sensitivity to UV induced DNA damage.
Short roots and shortened root meristem.
Short roots due to premature stem cell differentiation. Increased telomere length likely resulting from fewer replicative stem cell divisions prior to differentiation.
short siliques, very few seeds, elongated stems, elongated hypocotyls resulted from elongated epidermal and cortex cells, elongated pedicels resulted from elongated epidermal pavement cells and increased cortex cell numbers
Short siliques. Extra carpels.
Short siliques.  Extra carpels.
Short siliques.  Floral meristem indeterminacy. Carpels enclose extra floral organs
Short siliques.  Floral meristem indeterminacy. Carpels enclose extra floral organs.
Short siliques.  Indeterminate floral mersitem - carpels enclose extra floral organs.
Short siliquess.  Extra carpels.
Short stamens, reduced fertility.
Short stem, dark green and round leaves with short petioles. Has more lateral shoots than wildtype (Col).
Short straight hairs
showed a  defect in sedimentation of amyloplasts in the petiole
Showed a lower yield of seeds per plant. Most pollen adhered to an incorrect region below the stigma, which was probably caused by the incomplete elongation of stamens, resulting in low fertility.
Showed comparable decreases in the length of dark-grown hypocotyls, accompanied by increases in width in both epidermal and cortical cells. FTIR microspectroscopy also indicated a cellulose deficiency in epidermal or cortical cells.
Showed defects in cotyledon opening and hook straightening under continuous far-red light. Wild-type seedlings developed an open hook and cotyledons at 7 &#956;Wcm-2, whereas ndpk2 mutant seedlings had a closed hook and cotyledons at this fluence rate. At  14.7 &mu;Wcm-2, the hook was open but the cotyledons were not completely open.
Showed high sensitivity to UV-B, gamma-rays, and DNA cross-linkers. Both REV1 and REV3 transcripts were suppressed rev1rev3 double mutants.
Showed large repla and a reduction in valve width.
Showed some phenotypic similarity with tir3-1 axr1-12 plants, being more bushy than tir3-1 plants and often producing siliques in bundles.
Showed the same level of arsenic tolerance as the phyA-211 homozygous parent, but not as much tolerance as ars4 ars5 homozygous line.
show less sensitivity to ozone damage than wild-type Col-0 plants.
show more damage than wild-type Col-0 after exposure to either 500 or 700 ppb ozone.
shows features of a nitrogen-starved plant.
Shows no alteration in fruit phenotype.
Significant 1.75-fold increase of NAD levels.
significant decreased root elongation rates, densely clustered hairs at the root tip and outgrowth of lateral roots
Significant decrease in catalase activity; resistance to hydroxyurea (HU), a ribonucleotide reductase inhibitor effective in HIV, sickle cell disease, and blood cancer therapy.
Significant dwarfing at all stages of development compared with wild type.  Cell expansion in leaves, roots and hypocotyls is affected.
Significant increase (five- to sixfold) in the total amount of CSN5 with respect to the CSN5 level observed in the csn5a-2 single mutant.
Significant increase in expression of AT1G65330, AT1G65300, AT3G11180. Significant decrease in expression of AT4G20990, AT4G21000, AT5G46200, AT5G09280, AT5G36720, AT5G36805, AT2G30310, AT2G30220, AT4G26830, AT5G06170, AT3G19940, AT5G20340, AT5G03810, AT5G03820, AT3G26870, AT1G06540, AT1G02820, AT1G02550, AT2G14670, AT5G39200, AT5G39170, AT5G39140, AT1G09720, AT1G66570, AT5G22910, AT5G26250, AT3G17600, AT5G12060, AT2G46660, AT1G66220, AT3G19940, AT5G14470, AT5G47370, AT5G11820, AT4G39490, AT1G29230, AT3G09590, AT5G26100, AT3G26880, AT2G16130, AT2G16120, AT2G34920, AT1G18280, and AT1G29770.
Significant increase in the expression of the  GFP-CAO transgene.
Significant increase in the number of aborted seeds in siliques compared to wild type.
Significantly delayed leaf senescence.
Significantly elevated levels of amino acids in the seeds. Reduced seed volume.
Significantly impaired in NO biosynthesis in response to ABA compared to wild-type.
Significantly impaired in NO biosynthesis in response to exogenous H2O2 compared to wild-type.
Significantly increased susceptibility to the oomycete <i>Pythium irregulare</i>.
significantly reduced root growth
Significantly shorter roots.  50% reduction in vacuolar invertase (Vac-Inv) activity compared to parental line.
Significantly smaller cotyledons, leaves and petals compared to  wild type. Small leaves and flowers compared with the wild type ( The decreased size of sod7-1D leaves and petals was not caused by smaller cells indicating that the sod7-1D mutation results in a decrease in cell number.
Significantly smaller when grown in the presence of methyl methanosulfonate (MMS) with root growth.  Normal growth under standard growth conditions.
Significant reduction in cellulose.
Significant reduction in flowering time.
Significant reduction in the maximum quantum yield of PSII (Fv/Fm).
Significant reduction in the number of pollen tubes for the mutant compared with wild type.
Significant reduction in the number of stele initials  in 4-d-old shr-2 seedlings compared to wild-type plants.
Significant reduction in the percentage of germination unless seeds were stratified.
Significant reduction in trichome density on upper cauline leaves and branches.
Significant reduction of hydroxylated &beta;-rings xanthophylls.
Significant though  not complete reduction in flowering.
Siliques containing seeds at the globular stage of normal embryo development were found to include small abnormal seeds and aborted ovule-like structures.
Similar amount of PSI and PSII centers while wildtype plants have less PSI centers.
Similar delays in flowering in short days and similar acceleration of flowering by vernalization as Col.
Similar frequency of branched plasmodesmata as in ise2-1.
Similar phenotype to that described for lacs2-2.
Similar phenotype to that observed in the mur10 mutants.
Similar phenotype to that of lcr-3P77.
Similar phenotype to that of the irx8-2 irx1-1 double mutant.
Similar phototropic response of etiolated hypocotyls compared to that of wildtype.
Similar to arc5-1, with large, centrally constricted chloroplasts.
Similar to Atcand1-1 mutant. Resistant to sirtinol and auxin, but not to gibberellins or brassinolide. Displayed developmental phenotypes similar to those of axr1, namely, short petioles, downwardly curling leaves, shorter inflorescence. More severe inflorescence phenotype were found in this mutant compared to the atcand1-1 (ems-generated) mutation. Mutant plants were completely sterile.
Similar to bb-1/BB heterogygote plants. Slighly  larger petals and sepals compared to wild type.   Slightly increased flower biomass compared to wild type.
Similar to best1-1 single mutant. Low level of NPQ following a 40-s illumination, thylakoid lumen thickness larger, increase in total pmf (large increase in deltaPsi and slight decrease in dpH).
Similar to bp;pny double mutant.
Similar to bp single mutants.
Similar to cand1-2 and cand1-3 mutants. Rosette leaves of mutants plants were much smaller than those of wild-type plants and had a wavy morphology. Mutants flowered later than wild-type plants, with an increased number of rosette leaves indicating that the vegetative to reproductive growth transition of the primary shoot apical meristem was affected. The growth of axillary meristems is also abnormal, where a large number of smaller leaves are produced. Furthermore, the mutants have very low fertility, with less than one seed produced on average per silique. Mutant plants continued to make new flowers while wild-type plants of the same age started to senesce. Other notable phenotypes of cand1 mutants include dwarfism and loss of apical dominance. When examined closely, dwarfism largely results from reduced stem elongation. Mutant plants had a strong increase in the number of secondary inflorescences, an indication that they have lost apical dominance.
similar to germplasm sac9-1.
Similar to iku2-3 mutant, seed and embryo smaller in size, however the embryo cell size was comparable to control embryos. Precocious cellularization of the endosperm was observed. Expression levels of IKU2 reduced in mini3-1 background.
Similar to kan1 kan2 double mutant.  However, the ovules have a novel phenotype, forming a single amorphous structure in place of both integuments.
Similar to knat6;bp;pny except htat shows greater suppression on bp pny silique orientation defects.
similar to mia-1 and mia-2
Similar to non-revertant mea-1 mutant.
Similar to nua-1 and esd4-2 single mutants.  Have even shorter stamens and reduced fertility than the single mutants.
Similar to other trn1 mutants. Severely dwarfed, with twisted and malformed organs, sterile.
Similar to pdv1 mutants, mesophyll cell chloroplasts were frequently constricted and larger than those observed in the WT.
Similar to SALK_033745 line
Similar to tan-1 lec1-2, embryo arrested mostly at transition or heart stage.
Similar to teb-1, with a typical short-root phenotype and the aerial system that is reduced in size, with highly serrated and asymmetric leaves and a fasciated stem.
Similar to the agb1-2 single mutant in resistance to tunicamycin.
Similar to the phenotype of parental lines, mini3-1 and iku2-3. Seed size and weight comparable to single mutants lines.
similar to tpd1-1
Similar to var2-5; svr1-1 double mutant. Not variegated. Smaller than WT.
Similar to wild-type.
Similar to wild type siblings. Normal root hair  length. Segregates 1:1 for wt:het offspring as mutation affects the male gametophyte and is not transmitted.
Similar to wild type under normal growth conditions. When treated with 125 mM NaCl, proatcape1 seedlings showed increased salt tolerance. They displayed greenish cotyledons and generated true leaves, whereas wild-type seedlings exhibited yellowish cotyledons and stunted growth.
Similar to wild type when seedlings were grown on vertical plates.
single pin-formed inflorescence stem, no axillary or secondary inflorescences, no cauline leaves, flowers or siliques, dwarf, reduced number of rosette leaves which are curlier, altered leaf margins, more tricomes
single pin-formed inflorescence stem, reduced secondary inflorescence, no axillary inflorescences, no cauline leaves, flowers or siliques
Single whorl of sepals, then successive whorls of petals.   No stamens or carpels.
sixfold reduction in the growth of the bacterial pathogen PstDC3000
Size of aerial organs is greatly diminished.
Slight decrease in rosette leaf number.
Slight decrease in the number of cells in root apical meristem.
Slight decrease in the number of columella columns in axr1-12 seedlings compared with wild type.
Slight increase in delay in flowering under LD conditions compared to co-1 single mutant.
Slight increase in delay in flowering under LD conditions compared to soc1-2 single mutant.
Slight increase in delay of flowering compared to agl24 single mutant.
Slight increase in H2O2 levels in light-adapted mutant plants. But no change in dark-adapted plants.
Slight increase in inflorescence number compared with wild type.
Slight increase in rosette leaf number.
Slight increase in the number of short chains (DP 10 to 24) and decrease in that of longer chains (DP 31 to 46) in mutant starch.
Slight increase in the number of trichome branch points.
slightly earlier flowering time; reduced seed dormancy.
slightly earlier flowering under long day conditions. increased FT expression under long day conditions.
Slightly longer inflorescences, an extended period of blooming, a reduced number of elongated siliques, and overall reduced seed set. About a third of the siliques failed to develop. Pollen was not developed (lower and middle part of the inflorescence) or reduced (apical flowers).
Slightly longer primary root, less columella stem cell differentiation, equally sensitive to N-1-naphthylphthalamic acid (NPA) treatment as Col-0.
Slightly more infertile than the other ctr1 alleles.
Slightly reduced seed dormancy compared with wild-type seeds.
slightly retarded. Leaves contained undegraded starch at the end of night.
slightly retarded. Leaves contain undegraded starch at the end of night.
Slightly semi-dominant with respect to leaf morphogenesis.
slightly smaller than the wild type.
Slight reduction (~30%) of glucose and fructose contents in leaves, whereas sucrose content is similar to that of wild type under normal growth conditions.
slo3 mutant plants have severe growth retardation and delayed development. The size of root apical meristem (RAM) is reduced and the production of meristem cells is decreased.Rosette leaves are curled or crinkled, which may be derived from uneven growth of the leaf surface.
Slower gravitropic response than wildtype, although the final curvatures are comparable.
Slower growing and later flowering than wild type.tl1 Plants generally bear deformed
/n dark green rosette leaves.
Slower growth and short internodes. Otherwise normal.
Slower growth rate, pale green leaves. Impaired in photosynthesis (cyclic electron flow).
Slower phototropic response of etiolated hypocotyl compared to wildtype.
Slow-growing, large, crinkly leaves. Lamina cell size is reduced and pavement cells lose the typical jigsaw morphology, instead retaining the small, polygonal shape typical of immature cells.
slow growing, small leaves with short petioles, accumulates anthocyanin in the leaves, small and constitutively closed guard cells, shorter primary roots, fewer lateral roots, hypersensitive to osmotic stress, cold stress and high-light stress
Slow growing and slightly smaller than WT. Early bolting. Severely elongated mitochondria, often forming an interconnected network. Some small, discrete mitochondria are found in each cell. Mitochondrial movement is normal.
Slow-growing plant with decreased fertility.
Slow growth on kanamycin plates. Decreased resistance to kanamycin.
Small, dark-green rosette that grow slowly and develop into dwarfed, bushy pants. Some never bloom, and the one that do start blooming after three months (compared to six weeks for wild type). Flowers are small and mostly fertile.
Small, dwarfed plants that had short slender inflorescence stems and narrow leaves that curled upwards along the leaf margin.
small, pale green
Smaller and dramatically down-curling leaves.
Smaller and fewer leaves, reduced biomass compared to wild type under normal growth conditions.
smaller and paler plants. delayed flowering.  shriveled nonviable seeds carrying colorless embryos. delayed embryo development. embryos were arrested typically at the heart to torpedo stages.     The leaves of the double knock-out plants had a 70-fold increase in glycine level and a 6-fold increase in 5-formayl THF level.
Smaller and paler than either parental wild-type ecotypes (Col and Ws).
Smaller and paler than wild-type plants.  Reduction in both chlorophyll a and chlorophyll b.  Impaired photosynthesis.
Smaller leaves and shorter stems than wildtype.
Smaller organs, with a c. 12% reduction in the average blade area of the fully expanded &#64257;fth leaves compared with wild-type leaves.
Smaller rosette leaves, larger cauline leaves, short inflorescence stems. Correlation of visible phenotype with reduction in homogalacturonan biosynthesis. Abnormally formed vascular bundles are reduced in size.
Smaller rosette leaves, reduced primary root length,  reduced number of lateral root initiation sites, reduced emerged lateral roots per primary root, reduced lateral root density, reduced apical dominance.
Smaller rosette leaves than those of wild type.
Smaller rosettes and inflorescences in comparison to wild type. In addition, there were dent-like cavities and chlorotic areas in the leaves. Moderately increased levels of Ala, Arg, His, Ile, Phe, Pro Thr, Trp and Tyr, and Leu.  Extraordinary enhanced accumulation of Met.  Significant decrease in levels of Met-derived glucosinolates and increase in Leu-derived glucosinolates.
Smaller rosettes than either parental single mutants and severely reduced stature resembling strong <i>bri1</i> alleles, indicating that <i>serk3</i> mutation has a stronger effect on <i>bri1-6</i> than <i>serk1-1</i>.
Smaller than the wild type, and produced  narrow, asymmetric leaves when grown at  22?C. All five mutant alleles showed identical phenotypic responses to growth temperature. When grown at 16?C, vcs mutants resembled the wild-type controls except their leaves were pointed at the apex, and prolonged growth revealed defects in apical dominance. By contrast, growth at 29?C resulted in a strongly enhanced phenotype. These high temperature-grown mutants were chlorotic, leaves were narrow and epinastic, and prolonged growth resulted in a  callus-like growth at the apex. vcs roots  appeared similar to those of wild type,  except that at high temperature root hairs  occasionally appeared swollen. vcs also produced decreased numbers of lateral roots.
Smaller than wild-type.
smaller than wild type and develop fasciation.
Smaller than wt plants, slow growing with downwards curled leaves.  Flowers fail to open at maturity and exhibit organ fusions.  Roots are significantly shorter than wt.
Small plant. Leaves have reduced lamina and are deeply lobed. Lamina may curve to produce 'Knotty' leaves. Abnormally-shaped trichomes with supernumerary branches.
Small plants, seedling lethal.
Small plants with abnormal xylem and reduced levels of cellulose and other sugars.
Small SAM and limited root growth.
Small seed coat epidermal cells. Decreased ruthenium red staining.
Small seedlings, short petioles, round/dark green/inwardly curved true leaves. Smaller, compact rosettes compared to wildtype.
Small seedlings, with slightly darker green, orbicular leaf blades and shorter leaf petioles than WT. Adult plants are 17% shorter than WT.
Small seedlings, with slightly darker green, orbicular leaf blades and shorter leaf petioles than WT. Adult plants are 17% shorter than WT.  Short siliques, small seeds, lower seed weight than WT. Delayed flowering in long days.
Small seed phenotype, similar to iku2-3
Small with reduced leaf blades and earlier bolting than in the wild type. Abnormal flowers, hypersensitive to auxin.
snrk2.2 snrk2.3 was found to be ABA-insensitive in seed germination and early seedling growth  snrk2.2 snrk2.3 seeds showed green cotyledons at 5 d after sowing (non of the wild-type seeds had germinated at this time)  snrk2.2 snrk2.3 had decreased seed dormancy  snrk2.2 snrk2.3 was insensitive to the stimulating effect of low ABA concentration (<1 uM)on root growth  snrk2.2 snrk2.3 had a greatly reduced level of a 42-kD kinase activity capable of phosphorylating peptides from ABF (for ABA Response Element Binding Factor) transcription factors
somatic embryogenesis ability is very limited in lec1 mutants.
somatic embryogenesis  ability is very limited in lec2 mutants
Some 3P77 plants exhibited extremely strong fusions resulting in tearing of leaf tissues during their growth. Occasionally, petioles of some fused leaves have been forced to tear; however, the detached leaves did not senesce and remained green for several days.
Some lcr leaves displayed regions that virtually lacked all trichomes.
Some plants stop growing and die before setting seeds.
some reduction in growth rate in the dark, resulting in shorter hypocotyls in pmdh1, 1% sucrose rescued the mutant phenotype
Some reduction in growth rate in the dark, resulting in shorter hypocotyls in the pmdh1pmdh2 double mutant. The double mutant germinated, but seedling growth was arrested unless exogenous sucrose was provided, however even then the double mutant remained appreciably smaller than the wild type
Some seeds are aborted but surviving ones are larger than those of wild type.
spa1 mutants flower early in short day but not in long day.
Specifically affects female gametophyte while overall morphology of the mutant plants was normal. The cell wall of synergid cells in mutant plants lacked extensive invaginations characteristic of the filiform apparatus. Instead, an extremely thickened cell wall was observed. In most cases, synergid cells lacked cell wall projections completely and had uniform electron density. Also, pollen tube guidance is affected in mutant female gametophytes. In wild-type pollen (and myb98 mutant pollen), pollen tubes grew from the placenta to the funiculus but failed to grow into the micropyle. Despite, fertilization is not affected in mutant plant, female gametophytes affected by the myb98-1 mutation can become fertilized and give rise to seeds. Thus, with the exception of pollen tube guidance, the synergid cells appear to function normally in myb98-1 female gametophytes.
spontaneous cell death phenotype under short-day condition
Starch accumulation is not completely abolished in this line but strongly reduced to ~20% of wild-type level at the end of the day under 16h light/8h dark growth conditions.
Starch branching enzyme activity unaffected (similar to wild type levels).
Starch content similar to that observed in the sex1-3 single mutant, and different from that of sex4-5. At the end of the light period, the starch content of the double mutant was 1.7-fold that of sex4-5, and not different from that of sex1-3. At the end  of the dark period, its starch content was twice that of sex4-5, and 80% of that of sex1-3.
Starch excess phenotype.
Starch excess phenotype in leaves. Altered structure of leaf amylopectin.  Increased phosphate content of starch in leaves.  It is hypothesized that all of these phenomena result from the increase of activity in one or more of the other starch synthase isoforms upon loss of  starch synthase III.
Starch granules are slightly larger than those of wild type.
starch overproducer.
Stellate trichomes are frequently observed on carpels (never on wild-type).
Stem elongation is reduced by 76% compared to wild type.
Stem regrowth is reduced.
Stems are 32% taller than that of wild type Ler.
Stems are 35% taller than that of wild type Ler.
sterile
sterile, dwarf phenotype with small, round, dark leaves, a short hypocotyl and root and defective root gravitropism. Roots presented defects in directional orientation along the gravity vector, normal meristem size but a shorter elongation zone, reduced epidermal  cell length, delayed gravitropic  curvature and slower growth  than the wild-type
Sterile, produces numerous flowers but small, empty siliques.
Stomata are far less sensitive to ABA.
stomata are less sensitive to ABA. Seed germination was more rapid than wild type.
stomata are more sensitive to ABA. Seed germination was delayed compared to the wild type.
Stomatal aperture and root length show increased  sensitivity to ABA.
Stomatal aperture not affected by treatment with sodium nitroprusside (SNP).
Stomatal closure could not be induced by the bacterial PAMP (pathogen-associated molecular pattern) molecules <i>flg2</i> (a biologically active peptide derived from flagellin) or LPS (lipopolysaccharide).
Stomatal closure in response to bacteria and lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is compromised in the mutant.
stomatal development abnormal
Stomataless.  No asymmetric divisions to create the stomatal lineage are made.  Plants arrest as small pale seedlings.
Stomata of the mutant are greatly compromised in their ability to respond to either <i>Pst</i> DC3000 or <i>Pst</i> DC300/<i>avrRpt2</i>, suggesting that ABA biosynthesis is required for stomatal closure in response to these bacteria.
stomata open faster and the extent of aperture increase is larger in response to light
Straight hairs with ballooned bases
Strong chlorosis due to the loss of 80% of the photosynthetic pigments. Alterations in the ultrastructure  of chloroplasts, with a drastic reduction in the amount of  both appressed and unappressed thylakoid membranes. Reduced  accumulation of various LHCPs.
Strong cytokinin-insensitive phenotype.
Strong cytokinin insensitivity.
Strong delay in flowering and vernalization response.
Strong delay in hypersensitive response resulting in trailing plant cell necrosis, borne out by the appearance at late time points of autofluorescing dead cells on leaves. The plants were tested with inoculations of <i>Peronospora</i> isolate Noco2.
Strong enhancement of defects in leaf, stamen and carpel development compared with jag single mutants.
Strong enhancements of the gun phenotype: Lhcb1*2-GUS expression in the double mutants was ~fivefold higher than the single mutants and was about 11-17% of that observed in  nonphotobleached wild-type plants. The endogenous Lhcb1 mRNA levels were also  derepressed synergistically in the double mutants.
Stronger inhibition of root elongation by brassinolide compared to wildtype.
Stronger phenotype than gem1-1. Defects in cell division - particularly in the pollen which leads reduced transmission through pollen in heterozygotes. Sporphytic lethal as homozygote.
Stronger phenotype than qua1-1.
Stronger reduction of shoot development compared to double mutant ahk2-5 ahk3-7.
Strong growth arrest following germination even in the absence of ethylene. Plants fail to develop true leaves.
Strong increase in water soluble polysaccharides (WSPs) content.
Strong insensitivity to the hormone kinetin.
strongly decreased kinase activity, T161D plants showed various developmental defects; strongly reduced in growth. contained embryos that were small and displayed cotyledons that did not fold to one side; exhibited fewer but enlarged cells After germination, fewer and smaller leaves were generated by the T161D plants. Sterile phenotype; although all floral organs were present, the plants were entirely female- and male-sterile
Strongly enhanced cotyledon fusion phenotype of cuc1-1.
Strongly epinastic rosette leaves.
strongly impaired ability to induce somatic embryos in vitro
strongly repressed root growth when exposed to salt or manitol, callose accumulation at root tips exposed to salt.
Strongly resistant to infection with Botrytis cinerea strain: infection sites on mutant leaves remained usually symptom free, in contrast to those on Col leaves.
Strong protochlorophyllide fluorescence that etiolated mutant seedlings emit after they have been exposed to blue light.
Strong reduction in growth and in the capacity to transfer phosphate (Pi) from the root to shoot compared with pho1.
Strong reduction in maltose accumulation compared to the be2-1 be3-2 double mutant.
Strong reduction in primary root growth in sterile culture on minimal medium. Addition of different vitamins to the medium revealed that this phenotype was fully complemented by the provision of pyridoxine (vitamin B6) to the mutant.
Strong reduction in starch accumulation in double mutant.
Strong suppression of wol-1 mutant phenotype. Phenotype close to that of wild-type.
Structural changes of xyloglucan in roots, not in shoots.
stunted, increase in silique width and size, delayed flowering, reduced length of inflorescence, increase in number of leaves.
stunted, increase in silique width and size, delayed flowering, reduced length of inflorescence.
Stunted roots and reduced shoot size. Primary root length decreased (16% of wt) due to decreased cell number and reduced cell size.  Based on the expression of stem cell and QC markers , the activity of the QC is reduced compared to wild type.
Substantial decreases in DNA methylation at CpNpG and asymmetric sites but not at CpG sites with respect to the single mutants alone.
Substantially more pronounced prototypical Pi starvation root architecture responses than sos3-1 or wild-type seedlings. On Pi-limited medium, mutant seedlings exhibit an inhibition of primary root growth, an increase of lateral root development and length, and higher root/shoot fresh weight ratio than wild-type.  Enhanced resistance to Pseudomonas syringae DC3000.  Smaller in stature.  Impaired drought tolerance.
Subtle growth phenotypes under normal culture conditions: double mutant plants have slightly shorter petioles and smaller leaves, which would be expected if the double mutant produces less IAA.
Successive whorls of petals.
Supplementation of 5 &mu;M of pyridoxine restores growth to wild-type phenotype.
supplementing with various concentrations of 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and 5-fluorouridine (5-FD) (0-400 &#956;M). The wild-type plants showed high sensitivity to both 5-FU and 5-FD, whereas mutant plants remained unaffected. The growth of wild-type plants  decreased with increasing 5-FU concentration, and the highest growth retardation was observed in the plants treated with 400 &#956;M of 5-FU. Drastic growth retardation of wild-type plants was seen when they were treated with 5-FD. All plants were virtually killed except those treated with 50 &#956;M of 5-FD.
suppresses cell death and defense responses in bir1-1.
Suppresses elongation and gravicurviture in light grown hypocotyls.
suppresses the autoimmunity-related phenotypes of snc1.
Suppression in a substantial number of seedlings of the light-dependent cop1 phenotype where seedlings bleach and die when transferred from darkness to light.
Suppression of NaCl sensitivity of sos3-1 seedlings.
Suppression of the late-flowering phenotype of introgressed FRI allele.
Suppress the FRI late flowering phenotype.  Reduced H3K4 trimethylation at FLC locus.
Susceptibility to the virulent powdery mildew <i>Golovinomyces orontii</i> remains unchanged compared to wild type.
Susceptible to Hyaloperonospora parasitica isolate Hiks1 (HpHiks1).
Susceptible to L.maculans infection
Susceptible to L. maculans infection
susceptible to leaf infecting nectrophic pathogens
Susceptible to Leptosphaeria maculans
swn mutations enhanced the mea mutant phenotype in producing autonomous seeds
Synergistic phenotype: de-etiolated, fusca seedlings. Dark grown plants undergo photomorphogenesis; hypocotyl elongation ,cotyledon expansion, anthocyanin accumulation in cotyledons.
Synergistic phenotype compared to both single mutants.
tac1 mutants have narrow axillary shoot angles on inflorescence stems. They display a more vertical growth habit. Upon repeated removal and regrowth of inflorescence bolts, tac1 plants produce more tightly packed bolt clusters and have a more narrow diameter. Seeds of tac1 plants often exhibit faster germination, growth, and maturity; typically they are developmentally about 2-3 days ahead of Col-0.
TAS1, TAS2, and TAS3 ta-siRNAs were below detectable levels.
TAS1, TAS2, and TAS3 ta-siRNAs were detected.
TAS3 but not TAS1 or TAS2 ta-siRNAs were detected.
tbl34 esk1, tbl35 esk1 double mutant and tbl34 tbl35 esk1 triple mutants have more retarded plant growth and lower stem strength than wild type or esk1.
tbl3 tbl31 esk1 triple mutant exhibited smaller plant stature and lower stem strength than wild typle or esk1.
T-DNA insertion line, generated by vacuum infiltration of a Columbia (Col) plant with Agrobacterium tumefaciens vector pCSA110, a modified approach of Thermal Asymmetric Interlaced-Polymerase Chain Reaction (TAIL-PCR) was used to amplify DNA fragments fla
T-DNA insertion lines showed a slight but statistically significant delay in germination and was more sensitive to oxidative stress.
T-DNA knock-out mutants of PHO1;H1 neither showed growth defects nor alteration in phosphate (Pi) transport dynamics, or Pi content, compared with wild type.
Telomeres in the double mutants shortened at the same rate as in either single mutant.
Telomeres in wild-type siblings appeared as a homogeneous smear of products ranging from 1.6 to 4.5 kb. Telomeres were significantly shorter in pot1-2 than in wild-type, or even pot1-1.
Telomeres in wild-type siblings appeared as a homogeneous smear of products ranging from 1.6 to 4.5 kb. Telomere tracts in pot1-1 were much shorter than in wild-type and showed a more discrete banding pattern.
Telomeres of the same length and sharp banding profile were found in the double mutant, as in their tert and pot1-1 siblings.
temperature sensitive, impaired in adventitious root formation in hypocotyl. Similar to rpd1-1 mutation
Temperature sensitive (33?C) phenotype.
Temperature-sensitive mutant. Initial root primordium formation in the mutant hypocotyl explants proceeded normally at the restrictive temperature (28?C) on root-inducing medium; after three days of culture, the root primordium was arrested or strongly retarded at the two- to four-cell-layer stages. Therefore, the mutation inhibited the development of adventitious root primordia beyond the two-cell-layer stage without affecting the earlier processes of primordium development, including the initiation of cell proliferation. This developmental arrest was reversible upon temperature shift from 28?C to 22?C, root primordial developed normally and formed lateral roots. Mutant hypocotyl explants were cultured on callus-inducing medium at 22?C or 28?C. During the first four days of culture, callus growth appeared not to be affected in the mutant hypocotyls, compared with that in the wild-type explants. After day 4, however, callus growth in the mutant explants was retarded severely at 28?C.
temperature-sensitive mutant. srd2 seedlings grown at  the permissive temperature (22C) appeared almost normal. At 28C,  both hypocotyl and root explants of the srd2 mutant could  not establish shoot apical meristems de novo. When  primary root segments of srd2 were cultured on root-inducing  medium (RIM) at 28C, abnormal lateral root primordia  lacking functional apical meristems were frequently observed.  except that they had fewer lateral roots than the wild-type  seedlings. At the restrictive temperature (28C however, the development of true leaves and primary roots in srd2  seedlings was severely interrupted. Whereas root explants of the srd2 mutant formed  calli on callus-inducing medium (CIM), at either 22Cor 28C,  callus formation from srd2 hypocotyl explants was strongly  inhibited at 28C
Temperature sensitive phenotype.  When grown at 24 degrees C, seedlings have narrow cotyledons compared to wt.  When grown at 29 degrees C, seedlings display several tpl-1-like phenotypes, including monocots, tubes and pins.  Both shott and root can be disorganized.
tert-2 mutants in the G4 generation exhibit shorter chromosomes, but also form more massive calluses, indicative of an accelerated cell cycle. These calluses also die more quickly than calluses from wild type plants.
thad1-1 mutants have longer roots and elevated levels of thalianol and thalian-diol in root extracts compared to wild type plants. However, these mutants do not seem to have higher susceptibility to Atlernaria brassicicola or Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato DC3000 based on assays performed on seedling roots.
thah1-1 mutants have an elevated accumulation of thalianol and longer roots than wild type plants. Thalian-diol and desaturated thalian-diol are lost from the root extracts of thah1-1 mutants. However, these mutants do not seem to have higher susceptibility to Atlernaria brassicicola or Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato DC3000 based on assays performed on seedling roots.
thah1-2 mutants have elevated levels of thalianol in their root extracts when compared to wild type plants.
thas1-1 mutants do not produce detectable levels of thalianol in root extracts but low  levels of this compound can be detected in wild type root extracts. However, these mutants do not seem to have higher susceptibility to Atlernaria brassicicola or Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato DC3000 based on assays performed on seedling roots.
The 5-oxoproline (5OP) level in this mutant is not significantly different from the level in the oxp1-1 mutant, suggesting that GGT1 is not an important upstream enzyme for generating the 5OP used by OXP1.
The 5-oxoproline (5OP) level in this mutant is not significantly different from the level in the oxp1-1 mutant, suggesting that GGT4 is not an important upstream enzyme for generating the 5OP used by OXP1.
The 5-oxoproline (5OP) level in this mutant is not significantly different from the level in the oxp1-1 mutant, suggesting that neither GGT1 nor GGT4 are important upstream enzymes for generating the 5OP used by OXP1.
The ABA levels in the mutant seeds were as low  as those seen in red light-irradiated wild-type seeds irrespective of light conditions.
The abo8 mutants show retarded growth and are more sensitive to ABA than the wild type. Accumulates more reactive oxygen species (ROS). Reduced root meristem activity.
The aco mutant appears to have only ~85% of the ethylene of wild type plants.
The activity of ABA oxidase (ABAO) is dramatically reduced in the siliques and dry seeds of the mutant.
The activity of glyI in wild type and snrk2.8-1 knockout plants under control conditions and salt stress was tested. Salt treatment stimulated the activity of the enzyme in the wild type plant, but less stimulation was observed in the snrk2.8-1. glyI activity was lower after salt treatment in the snrk2.8-1, but salt stress still increased the protein activity.
The activity of SUS was reduced to 10% of wild-type levels in leaves of the mutant, and was undetectable (reduced to less than 10% of wild-type levels) in roots. The activity of invertase was unaffected in roots of this mutant, but in leaves neutral invertase activity was elevated by about 40%.
The aerial parts of this mutant are developmentally retarded compared to wild type.
The allantoate content of Ataah mutant seedlings grown for 2 weeks on plates with nitrate as the nitrogen source was severalfold higher than in the wild type.
The alteration produced in fruits by the as1  mutation was partially alleviated in the double mutants. Repla were narrow, practically reverting to the appearance of the wild type, and numbers of cells in both repla and valves were different from those of the as1 mutants.
The amounts of glucose, fructose, sucrose, cellulose (roots) and starch in the mutant were not statistically significantly different  from those of the equivalent wild-type lines grown under the same conditions at the same time.
The amt1;2-1 mutant appears to grow normally on  media with different levels of ammonium or ammonium nitrate, but, seems slightly more resistant to methylammonium that wild type seedlings. High affinity ammonium uptake is reduced in the roots of amt1;2-2 mutants. There is no change in the level of AMT1;1, AMT1;3, or AMT2;1 transcripts for these mutants relative to wild type in low or high nitrogen conditions.
The amt1;2-2 mutant appears to grow normally on  media with different levels of ammonium or ammonium nitrate, but, seems slightly more resistant to methylammonium that wild type seedlings. High affinity ammonium uptake is reduced in the roots of amt1;2-2 mutants. There is no change in the level of AMT1;1, AMT1;3, or AMT2;1 transcripts for these mutants relative to wild type in low or high nitrogen conditions.
The architecture of mutant flowers was distorted and was accompanied by reduced numbers of floral organs in the outer 3 whorls. This effect was least pronounced in the whorl of sepals (3.2 as against 4 in wild type) but the number of petals was reduced to 2.4 (4 in wild type) and on average, mutant flowers had only 3.5 stamens compared to 6 in wild type. In contrast, all mutant flowers contained 2 carpels such as in wild type but in 52% of mutant flowers, both carpels remained unfused and ovules were exposed.
The atmc8-1 mutant plant has a wild-type phenotype under normal growth conditions. Protoplasts derived from atmc8-1 mutants have 30-40% less cell death than wild-type protoplasts subjected to equivalent levels of UV light or hydrogen peroxide. atmc8-1 mutants also survive at much higher rates and develop further than wild type seeds when plated on media contain methyl viologen.
The atmc8-2 mutant plant has a wild-type phenotype under normal growth conditions. Experiments with leaf discs indicate that atmc8-2 is less sensitive to UV-induced ion-leakage than wild-type plants. Protoplasts derived from atmc8-2 mutants have 30-40% less cell death than wild-type protoplasts subjected to equivalent levels of UV light or hydrogen peroxide. atmc8-1 mutants also survive at much higher rates and develop further than wild type seeds when plated on media contain methyl viologen.
The AtTPK1-KO single mutant does not have any obvious aberrant phenotypes, but, the AtTPK1-KO /AtTPK2-KO double mutant demonstrates that these enzymes are required to produce thiamine pyrophosphate from thiamine.
The AtTPK2-KO single mutant does not have any obvious aberrant phenotypes, but, the AtTPK1-KO /AtTPK2-KO double mutant demonstrates that these enzymes are required to produce thiamine pyrophosphate from thiamine.
The atugp1/atugp2 double mutant showed extremely reduced plant growth and a delayed flowering time.
The average length of hypocotyls in the mutant seedlings is &#8764;3.5 mm under high-intensity white light condition (173 &#956;mole/sec per m2).
The average length of the hypocotyl and primary root of the rot3-2 mutant 9 days after sowing did not differ from those of the wild type, as was true also for the rot3-1 mutant. However, cotyledons of the rot3-2 mutant were slightly larger than those of the wild type, whereas the rot3-1 mutant had normal cotyledons.
The average midday activity of hexokinase (HXK) was 20% higher in the mutant leaves, statistically significant at the P = 0.1 level of confidence.
The average rate of pollen tube elongation is significantly lower than that of wild-type.
The average shoot weight of a 14-day-old mutant seedling is approximately half that of a 14-day-old wild-type seedling.
The AXR1/axr1-12, axl-1/axl-1 plants were similar to wild type with respect to overall morphology and fertility.
The axr1-12/axr1-12 AXL/axl-1 line are nearly completely resistant to auxin, a much more severe phenotype than for axr1-12 alone.
The bns-2 mutant has defects in inflorescence development.
The branching phenotype is more pronounced when plants are grown on short days owing to the nearly tenfold increase in inflorescence number in the mutant versus wild-type plants.
The cauline leaves in the mutant plants started senescence at 28 DAG, at least 10 days earlier than those in the wild-type plants. Further, the developing mutant siliques initiated senescence in their tips at 32 DAG, while the wild-type siliques showed no senescence symptoms  throughout their development but accumulated abundant anthocyanin which was not observed in the mutant siliques.
The cellular pools of the COP9 signalosome complex subunits: CSN1, CSN3, CSN5, CSN6, CSN7,  and CSN8, are reduced drastically compared with those in wild type.
The cesa2/cesa6 double mutant has reduced hypocotyl length in the dark, reduced root length in the light, strong dwarf and bushy.
The Chl a/b ratio was slightly reduced.
The chlorophyll content index in the mutant is lower than in wild type.
The chlorophyll content index of the double mutant did not differ from the single mutants, and the germination percentage of freshly harvested seeds was slightly higher than that of the single mutants.
The chlorophyll content of the wild-type plants decreased with increasing 5-FU and 5-FD concentrations, and the lowest chlorophyll content was obtained with 400 &mu;M of 5-FU or 5-FD treatments. However, the chlorophyll content of the mutant plants was not affected by the 5-FU and 5-FD treatment.
The  chromosome fragmentation phenotype of the asy1/  Atrad51 double mutant is indistinguishable from that of  the Atrad51 mutant.
The circadian-associated phenotypes, including flowering time and red light sensitivity during early photomorphogenesis (i.e. elongation of  hypocotyls) are identical between wild type and mutant.
The colour of mutant seeds is normal and similar to that of the wild type.
The Col PHYD allele was back-crossed into the Ws line.
/nUnder normal growth conditions, PHYD+ plants are indistinguishable from wild-type plants. Furthermore, when partially shaded or darkened, mature leaves of PHYD+ exhibit leaf yellowing as mature leaves from wild-type plants. For more information on this line, see the original report by Aukermann et al 1997, doi: http:/&#8203;/&#8203;dx.&#8203;doi.&#8203;org/&#8203;10.&#8203;1105/&#8203;tpc.&#8203;9.&#8203;8.&#8203;1317
The columella of AXL/axl-1 axr1-12/axr1-12 root tips is highly disorganized during early seedling root growth, and is completely disrupted at the time when root growth ceases.
The cortical microtubules of epidermal cells in the mutant internodes tend to form a more longitudinal array than those in the wild-type internodes.
The cutin layer on the adaxial surface of mutant leaves was not significantly different in cross-sectional thickness from that of control wild-type leaves. However, the abaxial cutin layer on mutant leaves was substantially thinner than the wild type.
The cwinv4-2 mutant has reduced invertase activity in its cell wall fraction and it does not secrete nectar. However, it has normal nectary morphology.
The dcaf1-1 mutation appears to arrest embyro development at the globular stage in presumed dcaf1-1 homozygous mutants. There are no obvious phenotypic defects in heterozygous plants grown under normal conditions.
The dcaf1-2 mutation appears to arrest embyro development at the globular stage in presumed dcaf1-2 homozygous mutants. There are no obvious phenotypic defects in heterozygous plants grown under normal conditions.
The defect exhibited by the double mutant in ABA-induced stomatal closure was similar to that exhibited by both single mutants.
The developing flowers of atxth28 mutant showed has characteristic phenotypes a significantly lower elongation ratio of the stamen at the pollination stage, an increased angle between the stamen and pistil, and an aberrant orientation of anther dehiscence.As a result the capability for automatic self-pollination was decreased in the mutant.
The development and size of the double mutant root meristems were comparable to those of ahk3-3 meristems.
The diameter of the shoot apical meristem is about three times smaller than that of wildtype.
The distinct osmium-dense cuticular membrane  representing insoluble lipid-derived polymers such as cutin, visible at the epidermal outer extracellular matrix of WT plants, could not be seen at the leaf epidermis of the mutant. The remaining outer epidermal extracellular matrix sometimes had a distinct laminated structure.
The double homozygous progeny is seedling lethal.
The double mutant, however, had dramatically reduced Alcian Blue staining in both the style and the septum compared with wild type. In analyzing pre-fertilization stages of development, the transmitting tract of the hec1 hec3 double mutant had no delay in onset of ECM production, but produced less ECM than wild type.
The double mutant exhibited almost no promotion of germination.
The double mutant exhibits an additive trichome phenotype. The cluster frequency and number of nuclei was similar to that in elc single mutants and the number of branches was similar to that in kak single mutants.
The double mutant exhibits much stronger auxin-related phenotypes than those of the  single mutants. Adult double mutant plants have thin and short inflorescence stems, and their rosette leaves are small and epinastic. In addition, it has reduced numbers of inflorescence stems, suggesting enhanced apical dominance. By contrast, its flowers appear to be  normal, and they fertilize normally.
The double mutant germinated much better in response to increasing red light fluences. At 0 &mu;mol.m-2 red light fluence, the double mutant germinated ~15%, whereas the wildtype and single mutant seeds did not germinate under this light condition. At 5 &mu;mol.m-2, the double mutant germinated ~60%, whereas the wild type and the two single mutants germinated only ~5%. At a higher red light fluence (65 &mu;mol.m-2), all seeds germinated ~100%.
The double mutant germinates almost 100% in response to even 5 &mu;MGA3, irrespective of light conditions.
The double mutant has the same flowering time as the svp single mutant.
The double mutant is gametophytic lethal for both female and male gametophytes.
The double mutant is still responsive to ethylene. Moreover, inhibitors of ethylene perception or biosynthesis including AgNO3 and aminoethoxyvinyl glycine (AVG) could not suppress the constitutive triple response (ctr1).
The double mutant line was much more  severely affected by flooding. After the 4 days of flooding, root weight had increased by only 44% (compared to 72% for wild type), and there was not statistically significant gain in root weight in the 3 days following flooding. At the end of the 7-day period, the flooding treatment had reduced the gain in root weight by  71% relative to unflooded control plants (compared to 33% for wild type).
The double mutant mutant displays agravitropic responses in both hypocotyls and roots. When seedlings are grown vertically under dark conditions, the regulation of growth orientation is disrupted in both hypocotyls and roots, with the hypocotyls occasionally growing downward and the roots upward. Also, the roots and hypocotyls of the double mutant show reduced gravitropic curvatures compared with the wild type when vertically dark-grown seedlings are reoriented by 90?.
The double mutant progeny does not develop flowers.
The double mutant responded less to vernalization than either single mutant.
The double-mutant seedlings contains &#8764;80% anthocyanin accumulation compared with that of the hy5 mutation alone.
The double mutant seedlings had significantly shorter and swollen roots. The plants had stunted growth and reduced size.
The double mutants had significantly less xylose compared with the irx8 and irx9 single mutant plants. Whereas irx8 and irx9 contain ~40 to 50% xylose compared with the wild type, the double mutant contained only ~20% xylose compared with wild-type plants.
The double mutant showed a complete loss of apical dominance, lacking normal dominance of the central apical meristem, and the development of a central inflorescence. All double mutants grown to maturity had >30 shoots of comparable length.
The double mutant was as susceptible to <i>A. brassicicola</i> as pad3-1 and cyp71A13 mutants.
The early senescence process was arrested when nitrate was added after depletion.
The ectopic formation of secondary walls normally seen in the ful mutant is suppressed in the double mutant.
The edr3 mutant of Arabidopsis shows enhanced disease resistance to Erysiphe cichoracearum: edr3 mutant plants formed large lesions upon infection of E. cichoracearum and supported little sporulation.  The edr3 mutant displays normal responses to virulent and avirulent strains of Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato DC3000 and shows enhanced susceptibility to Botrytis cinerea.
The efficiency of cotyledon greening in srrp1 mutant plants was significantly lower than that of the wild- type plants in an ABA concentration-dependent manner.
The elongated phenotype was only observed under far-red light but not under any other light conditions tested (red, blue and white).  The phenotype was almost as severe as that of phyA null mutant with respect to inhibition of hypocotyl elongation, cotyledon expansion and resistance to "FR-induced" killing.
The endogenous levels of ABA are significantly lower than those of the aao3 single mutant.
The enhancement of the second-whorl phenotypes in these double mutants resulted from AG misexpression.
The epidermal cells on the lower surface of the filaments of rbe-1 had an irregular ridged structure similar to that of the lower surface of the wild type, but the cells were flattened and elliptic. The position of the filamentous petals was normal; that is, they were formed in the second whorl at a position between the medial and lateral sepals. Furthermore, in the small or spoon-shaped petals of rbe-1, the epidermal cells had a ridged structure and were smaller . This suggests that the position and identity of the aberrant-shaped petals of rbe was not altered.
The establishment frequency of the mutant seedlings is similar to wild type levels and only becomes compromised when seedlings are grown in short days.
The expression levels of solo LTR  were  elevated in the rdr2-1/jmj24-1 double mutant compared to the rdr2-1 single mutant. SDC  which is derepressed in rdr2-1 is further activated in rdr2-1/jmj24-1 double mutant.
The fate of telomeres in pot1 mutants was followed for several plant generations and it was found that telomere length in pot1-1 decreased progressively with each generation. The ever-shorter-telomere phenotype and sharp TRF banding profile were strikingly similar to the phenotype associated with tert mutants, which lose 200-500 bp of telomeric DNA per plant generation.
The first meiotic division of pollen mother cells because the homologs neither pair nor  form SCs due to the lack of initial DSB formation
The flg22 peptide failed to induce the closure of stomata in epidermal peels of the mutant.
The flowering of hub1-4 mutants is accelerated compared to wild type plants under long days and short days. In addition, the plants are small and have pale green leaves. Histone2B ubiquitination is lost in hub1-4 mutants. FLC expression is suppressed in these mutants. There are gene-specific changes in the patterns of histone ubiquitination and methylation in this mutant.
The flowering of hub1-5 mutants is accelerated compared to wild type plants under long days and short days. In addition, the plants are small and have pale green leaves.
The flowering of hub2-2 mutants is accelerated compared to wild type plants under long days and short days. In addition, the plants are small and have pale green leaves. Histone2B ubiquitination is lost in hub2-2 mutants.
The flowering of ubc1/2 double mutants is accelerated compared to wild type plants under long days and short days. Histone2B ubiquitination is lost in ubc1/2 mutants and FLC expression is repressed. There are gene-specific changes in the patterns of histone ubiquitination and methylation in this mutant.
The flowers and third cauline leaves of gis2 mutants were less sensitive to GA.
The germination frequency of ga1 mutant seeds showed light dependence in the presence of low to moderate concentrations of exogenous GA3. Under PHYB-dependent germination conditions (1 h of imbibition followed by a pulse of red or far-red light), the germination frequency of the ga1 mutant reached virtually 100% in the presence of 50 &mu;MGA3, irrespective of light conditions. However, at concentrations of <50 &mu;M GA3, the germination frequency was higher in ga1 mutant seeds irradiated with red light versus those irradiated with far-red light.
The germination of mutant seeds was markedly  inhibited by both salt (NaCl) and osmotic stress (mannitol). The inhibition  of germination of the mutant was observed at as low a concentration as 50 mM NaCl, at which concentration the wild-type seeds hardly showed any inhibition in germination.  As the concentrations of NaCl in the media increased, the negative effect of the mutation became more evident. On the high salt medium (greater than or equal to 150 mM NaCl), germination of ein2-5 mutant seeds was inhibited to a greater extent than the wild-type seeds. Likewise, in the medium containing mannitol, the ein2-5 mutant seeds showed similar kinetics in germination. Within a four-day  period, ein2-5 seeds had more than a 30% reduction in germination in the presence of 500 mM mannitol.
The germination rates of the mutant were significantly reduced by 0.003% (v/v,~0.5 mM) ethanol, whereas the wild type germinated normally in the presence of at least 0.3% (v/v) ethanol.
The greenhouse-grown mutant was slightly dwarfed.
The growth of hub1-2 seedlings on medium without sucrose is severely delayed compared with wild-type seedlings. Addition of 1.5% sucrose to the medium can rescue the delayed development of hub1-2, suggesting a defect in seedling establishment.
The gynoecial defects of ett-1 mutants, such as reduction in ovary size and increased gynophore elongation, were enhanced by the sty1-1 mutation. A number of double mutant gynoecia were nearly completely valveless, and in those, ovules grew on top of a placental surface. In addition, the apical ends of sty1-1 ett-1 gynoecia were less fused than those of ett-1 and sty1-1, and ovules frequently protruded at the apex. The amount of stylar and stigmatic tissues was reduced compared with ett-1, and the double mutant was sterile. As in ett-1 gynoecia, ectopic tissue of transmitting tract identity was generally present.
The gynoecia of double mutants showed severe reduction of the ovary and morphological abnormalities in the apical region that were similar  to ett strong allele mutant phenotypes. Occasionally, inflorescences of the double mutant failed to produce any normal flower buds, resulting in pin-like structures that were not found in either stv1 or ett single mutants. Pin-like inflorescences are formed in mp, pid, and pin1 mutants and in wild-type plants treated with polar auxin transport inhibitors.
The hdg11-2 mutant has increased trichome branching.
The hec1,2,3 spt quadruple mutant had an enhanced phenotype compared to the hec1,2,3 triple or spt single. Carpels were completely unfused at the apical part, up to one third of the entire fruit indicative of a synergistic interaction.
The hec3 transmitting tract was smaller in size than wild type in both the septum and the style , but had the same general appearance as wild type.
The hgo-1 mutant suppresses the sscd1 cell death phenotype.
The hlr-1 (halted root-1) mutant has defective cell organization in the post-embryonic root and shoot apical meristems. Quiescent center cell identity in the root is lost after germination and expression of the organizing center marker WUSCHEL in the shoot is disrupted. However, cells in differentiated tissues maintain their normal identities. hlr-1 mutants have shorter roots, aberrant lateral root primordia positioning, abnormal leaf shape and phyllotaxy, and irregular shoot structure.
The hlr-2 mutant is reported to share the same morphological characteristics with the hlr-1 mutant, but to have a slightly milder phenotype. hlr-1 has defects in root and shoot apical meristem organization, and root and shoot development.
The hmg1 mutant has reduced levels of sterols compared to wild-type plants, but, its sterol composition is normal. It also has about a 65% drop in triterpenoid levels compared to wild-type plants.
The hmg2 mutant has about 15% lower sterol levels than wild type plants, but its sterol composition is normal. It also has about a 25% drop in triterpenoid levels compared to wild-type plants.
The homozygous cesa6/cesa5 double mutant is seedling lethal.
The homozygous double mutants progeny were severely dwarfed and sterile. The leaves were dark green, indicating an increase in chloroplasts per leaf area of the mutants, which was probably due to the reduced cell size. Several double mutant plants were unable to bolt and only grew rosette leaves.
The homozygous mutant progeny are severely  deformed and are smaller in size compared with the wild type, possibly reflecting a reduction in water transporting ability.
The homozygous plants are infertile.
The homozygous progeny does not form flower buds.
The homozygous progeny has an albino phenotype and does not produce seeds.
The homozygous progeny has unexpanded cotyledons, narrow leaves, and a unique stem with abnormal inflorescences bearing infertile flowers.
The homozygous progeny is albino.
The homozygous progeny is embryo-lethal.
The homozygous progeny is indistinguishable from wild-type plants during vegetative growth but showed several morphological alterations after bolting. These plants displayed enhanced inflorescence branching and formed three times as many siliques and flowers as did wild-type plants.
The homozygous progeny is seedling lethal, showed arrested postembryonic development including cotyledon expansion, development of vascular networks, root elongation, and shoot development.
The homozygous progeny is self-sterile.
The hypocotyl growth rate of the double mutant, which was initially slower than that of prc1-1, strongly increased beyond day three to reach over half the growth rate of WT hypocotyls between day four and day five. Beyond day five, the growth rate dropped, but more gradually than that of the WT.
The hypocotyl growth rate of the mutant remained more or less constant before slowing down from day six on.
The hypocotyl length of the double mutant grown at 26?C was ~50% of the length of the wild type grown under the same conditions. This reduction in hypocotyl length likely correlates with decreased levels of endogenous-free IAA. Adult cyp79B2 cyp79B3 plants are also sensitive to temperature changes. cyp79B2 cyp79B3 grown at 19?C has much smaller, slightly curled leaves that are characteristic of known IAA-resistant mutants.
The hypocotyl length of the double mutant is slightly decreased; this effect is largely due to reduction in cell number rather than cell size.
The hypocotyl of the mutant is as short as that of WT in far-red light but is not inhibited in red light.
The hypocotyl of this mutant responds normally to ACC when grown in the dark, but, its roots are moderately less sensitive to ACC than wild type seedlings grown under the same conditions. This difference in sensitivity can be eliminated when the mutants are treated with ACC and low levels of IAA. wei8-1 and wild type hypocotyls and roots respond similarly to IAA in the absence of ACC. The roots of wei8-1 mutant seedlings do not display proper gravitropism. High-temperature mediated hypocotyl elongation is reduced by ~25% in these mutants compared to wild-type seedlings.
The hypocotyl of this mutant responds normally to ACC when grown in the dark, but, its roots are moderately less sensitive to ACC than wild type seedlings grown under the same conditions. This difference in sensitivity can be eliminated when the mutants are treated with ACC and low levels of IAA. wei8-2 and wild type hypocotyls and roots respond similarly to IAA in the absence of ACC.
The hypocotyl vascular system only contains xylem cells. Secondary vascular tissue develops in the upper part of the hypocotyl.
The ibm1-1 mutation causes hypermethylation of the BONSAI (At1g73177) locus in the first generation in which the mutant allele becomes homozygous. The BONSAI gene undergoes cytosine methylation, primarily associated with non-CG  sites in the ibm1-1 mutant, whereas there is almost no evidence of cytosine methylation at this locus in wild type seedlings. Methylation at repetitive regions, including centromeric satellites, or 5S rRNA genes are not compromised in the ibm1-1 mutant. ibm1-1 mutants have morphological defects that become apparent at the F3 generation, including small narrow leaves, arrested flower development, and faulty pollen development.
The ibm1-4 mutation causes hypermethylation of the BONSAI (At1g73177) locus in the first generation in which the mutant allele becomes homozygous, and there is a higher level of H3mK9 at the BONSAI locus in ibm1-4 mutant than in wild type rosette leaves. ibm1-4 mutants have morphological defects that become apparent at the F3 generation, including small narrow leaves, arrested flower development, and faulty pollen development. The growth defects observed in ibm1-4 are exacerbated in a ddm1-1 mutant background ddm1-1has also been shown to cause BONSAI hypermethylation. Meanwhile, DNA methylation and developmental defects are suppressed in kyp (At5g13960) and cmt3 (At1g69770) mutant backgrounds.
The ibr10-1 mutants are resistant to the inhibitory effects of intermediate levels of indole-3-butyric acid on root elongation, but their roots show the normal response to indole-3-acetic acid, NAA, and 2.4-D. Their root growth is also resistant to 2,4-DB, a compound that can be processed to produce 2,4-D via beta-oxidation. Lateral root proliferation in response to IBA is also reduced dramatically in ibr10-1 mutants, although they still produce normal numbers of lateral roots in response to NAA. ibr10-1 mutants do not require sucrose for dark-grown hypocotyl elongation suggesting that they do not have a general defect in peroxisomal beta-oxidation. And their root growth is not inhibited by propionate or isobutyrate suggesting that IBR10 is not required for the metabolism of these compounds. ibr10-1 mutants are fertile, suggesting that IBR10 is not required for JA metabolism, and they also have a wild-type size, morphology, and pigmentation.
The ibr1-2 mutants are resistant to the inhibitory effects of intermediate levels of indole-3-butyric acid on root elongation, but their roots show the normal response to indole-3-acetic acid, NAA, and 2.4-D. Their root growth is also resistant to 2,4-DB, a compound that can be processed to produce 2,4-D via beta-oxidation. Lateral root proliferation in response to IBA is also reduced dramatically in ibr1-2 mutants, although they still produce normal numbers of lateral roots in response to NAA. ibr1-2 mutants do not require sucrose for dark-grown hypocotyl elongation suggesting that they do not have a general defect in peroxisomal beta-oxidation. And their root growth is not inhibited by propionate or isobutyrate suggesting that IBR1 is not required for the metabolism of these compounds. ibr1-2 mutants are fertile, suggesting that IBR1 is not required for JA metabolism, and they also have a wild-type size, morphology, and pigmentation.
The ibr1 mutants are resistant to the inhibitory effects of indole-3-butyric acid on root elongation, but their roots show the normal response to indole-3-acetic acid.
The induction of GA biosynthesis and GA upregulated genes after irradiation with red light is inhibited in the mutant compared to wild type.
The inflorescences of emf2-10 plants produced few flowers. In wild type, the primary inflorescence produced 25-30 flowers before arresting development. In emf2-10, after 6-12 flowers had opened, the remaining flower buds arrested development so that the inflorescence subsequently appeared determinate. The flowers of emf2-10 plants mostly had normal organ identity but were smaller than wild type, and petals and sepals were narrower than in wild type. The flower buds often opened later than normal, after fertilisation had occurred, so that the elongation of the developing silique (fruit) was constrained and the siliques became bent or folded over.
The inhibition of root growth in WT plants by trehalose could be overcome by bypassing the need for starch breakdown through continuous light. Partial effects were observed with long day conditions (16 h/8 h light/dark regime). However, continuous light could not overcome the effects of trehalose on gene expression (AT1G10760, AT4G17090, AT5G16150), or starch accumulation in the cotyledons.
The initiation of abaxial trichomes occurs marginally earlier than those of wild type Ler.
The jar1-1 mutant shows moderate insensitivity to MeJA in root growth  inhibition assays, but it has normal male fertility.
The jar1-8 mutant shows moderate insensitivity to MeJA in root growth  inhibition assays.
The kinetics of NPQ formation were altered in the mutant plants compared with the wild type; in the latter, the rapid rise in NPQ was followed by a slower phase, whereas in the mutant, the slower phase was almost completely absent. The reduction in qE in the CP24-depleted plants was observed at all light intensities, with a maximum reduction of ~60% in the mutants.
The kyp-2 mutant has defects in callus formation under laboratory conditions. Many fewer seeds form calluses compared to wild type seeds, and the calluses that do form are delayed and smaller in size. kyp-2 mutants are defective in the process known as alternative lengthening of telomeres, a telomerase-independent process. These mutants also show a loss of association between K9-dimethylated H3 histones and telomeric and centromeric DNA via ChIP assays.
The lacs1-1 lacs2-3 double mutants had a synergistic phenotype, compared to either of the single mutants, with drastically reduced stem wax and cutin contents, increased cuticle permeability, and severe male sterile in low humidity.
The lamina area of mature first and second mutant leaves was reduced to 55% of that of the wild type. The length:width ratio was significantly increased, reflecting a much stronger reduction in width than in length of the blade. The mutation also affected rosette growth, reducing fresh and dry weight at flowering by 40 and 39%, respectively.
The leaf color of  mutants grown in soil was duller than that of the wild type;  overall, the mutant plants were less rigid.
The leaves of mature mutant plants  consistently had small, white lesions on the tips or margins of fully expanded leaves. The lesions did not increase in size after appearance and were not bordered by chlorotic tissue. The frequency and severity of lesions varied between batches of plants, but lesion-free mutant plants were rare. Further examination of the lesions on leaves of the mutant plants revealed that high levels of starch were present in the living cells bordering each lesion at the end of the night, when the rest of the leaf had metabolized its starch. This starch accumulation occurred in a highly  cell-specific manner with adjacent starch-rich and starch-free cells.
The leaves of the double mutant expand more slowly than those of wildtype. At 17days after germination, their surface area is 55% that of wildtype plants.
The leaves of the mutant are paler than those of the wild type, and growth is significantly reduced. The leaf area of the mutant is ~75% lower than that of wild-type plants 26 d after germination.
The leaves of the rot3-2 mutant were longer than those of the wild type.
The leaves of the rot3-2 mutant were wider than those of the wild type.
The leaves of the triple mutant expand more slowly than those of wildtype. At 17 days after germination, their surface area is 20% that of wildtype plants.
The leaves were visibly pale, and flowering was delayed by 5-7 days compared with the wild type plants. Mature mesophyll cells in mutant leaves contained fewer, larger chloroplasts than in wild type, and these were heterogeneous in size. This phenotype was more pronounced in older than in younger leaves. Mesophyll cell chloroplasts in wild type and mutant plants also differed ultrastructurally. In mutants, grana lamellae were less uniform in length and stacked in a staggered fashion, giving rise to a disorganized thylakoid array. Stroma thylakoids appeared less abundant than in wild type chloroplasts. In contrast, stroma thylakoids in mutants were similar in length to those in wild type but constituted a smaller proportion of the total thylakoid network.
The lengths of all the true leaves (foliage leaves) of the mutants were shorter than those of the wild type.
The level of the xanthophyll cycle pigments (VAZ-pool) was higher than in WT plants.
The levels of cZR contained in tRNA are decreased to ~30% of those found in wild type; in contrast, the levels of iPR in tRNA remain unchanged.
The levels of iPR contained in tRNA are decreased to 4% of those found in wild type.
The levels of several ER-stress-responsive protein disulfide isomerases (PDI1,5,6,9,10,11) are reduced in this mutant, when ER stress is replied. However, the level of transcripts for the non-ER-stress-responsive PDI2 and PDI8 is slightly increased under these conditions in the atbzip60 mutant relative to WT plants.
The levels of sucrose, fructose, glucose 6-phosphate and glucose 1-phosphate are not significantly deviating from those of wild type or the single mutants.
The levels of the biologically active gibberellins, GA4 and GA1, were significantly reduced in long day photoperiod-grown mutant plants.
The levels of transcripts for several genes, such as At3g28740 (CYP81D11) and At5g16980 (NADP-dependent oxidoreductase) are altered in scl14 mutant plants. Some of these genes have as-1-like elements in their promoters.
The lhp1-1 mutant flowers early and displays aberrant organ development and plant architecture.
The lhp1-2 mutant flowers early and displays aberrant organ development and plant architecture.
The longitudinal length of epidermal cells is ~1.9 times that of the wild type.
The luminescence response of the ros1/ ros1::ddm1/ddm1 double mutant was much higher than that of ros1/ros1::DDM1/DDM1 plants, but was still lower than that of ROS1/ROS1::DDM1/DDM1 plants.
The majority (96%) of chlorophyll a and b molecules are conjugated with either tetrahydrogeranylgeraniol (THGG), dihydrogeranylgeraniol (DHGG), or geranylgeraniol (GG) (incompletely reduced side chains). Almost no alpha-tocopherol present in mutant.
The majority of the slowly growing homozygous mutant progeny produced almost transparent rosette leaves; however, in approximately one-third of the plants, the leaves appeared white. This subpopulation of mutants was even smaller and did not produce inflorescences.
The maltose accumulates mostly in the cytosol (~80%).
The meristem of the mutants did not stop growing at 5 dpg and kept increasing in size. Furthermore, the growth rate of mutant roots was higher than the wild-type, resulting in longer roots.
The methionine-derived glucosinolate content was reduced to 53% in the leaves. Meanwhile, the level of free methionine was increased for about five-fold. Extremely high level of S-methylmethione, the main transport form of methionine, was found in the seeds.
The midday and midnight activities of DPE1, DPE2, &beta;-amylase, and phosphoglucomutase (PGM) were not changed in the <i>atphs2-1</i> leaves relative to wild-type leaves.
The mlh1-1 mutant has reduced seed set and shorter siliques compared to a wild-type plant, but it does maintain both male and female fertility. It also has a reduced number of mitotic recombination events in a GUS-based assay. In addition, it has a greater proportion of homeologous recombination events than wild-type plants suggesting that MLH1 normally promotes homologous mitotic recombination but limits homeologous recombination.
The morphology of mutant plants was similar and to some extend weaker than ssm plants. Ectopic occurrence of myrosin cells is found in the leaves (increased number of myrosin cells). Mutant plants accumulated abnormally abundant levels of TGG1 and TGG2, both enzymatically active proteins.
The movement of GFP between cells is increased in this double mutant.
The muatant showed a reduction in the sucrose-induced expression of the starch biosynthetic gene ApL3.
The mutant contained only 17-33% of GSLs with 4C or 5C Met side-chains [4-methylthiobutyl GSL (4MTB), 4-methylsulfinylbutyl GSL (4MSOB) 5-methylthiopentyl GSL (5MTP), and 5-methylsulfinylpentyl (5MSOP)], 1.7% of GSLs  with a 6C chain [6-methylthiohexyl GSL (6MTH) and 6-methylsulfinylhexyl GSL (6MSOH)], and 0.3?0.7% of GSLs with 7C or 8C chains [7-methylsulfinylheptyl (7MTH), 7-methylsulfinylheptyl (7MSOH), 8-methylthiooctyl GSL (8MTH), and 8-methylsulfinyloctyl GSL (8MSOO)] as the wild-type plant.
The mutant died eventually in the presence of 0.1% ethanol.
The mutant displayed slightly altered siliques with a moderate bumpy appearance. A closer inspection of these fruits showed that they had developed enlarged repla with more cells than those of the wild type.
The mutant displays homeotic floral anomalies.
The mutant does not show additional hypocotyl elongation under far-red light-enriched conditions, whereas the wild-type seedlings  display more than a twofold increase in hypocotyl elongation.
The mutant do not display any obvious morphological defects in white light and after the seedling stage.
The mutant embryos are morphologically normal, although mature embryos are more yellow compared to white wild-type embryos.
The mutant exhibits a significant flg22-induced reduction in bacterial growth, indicating that the gene is most probably not required for flg22-induced bacterial resistance.
The mutant exhibits a substantial  reduction in recombination such that the chiasma  frequency at metaphase I was &#8764;7% that of wild  type.
The mutant exhibits very low levels of root  growth and malate release in the presence of  Al (0.2 nmol plant-1 24 h-1).
The mutant fruits displayed the same phenotype as seen in those of as1-1.
The mutant grew faster than psbo1 but more slowly than WT. Leaves are dark green, more elongated and with bent edges.
The mutant grew significantly more slowly than the WT. Leaves are pale green and parallel to the surface.
The mutant had shorter, more slender  inflorescence stems with fewer auxillary branches and side bolts. Mutant produced fewer flowers than WT and had fewer and shorter siliques, fewer seeds per silique and a higher percentage of sterile siliques, resulting in less seed production. More than half of the mutant flowers were fertile, and although they were smaller than WT flowers, they opened normally and had normal arrangements and numbers of floral organs. Some sterile flowers were open, while others remained closed. One reason for sterility was the failure of the stamens to elongate beyond the pistil at floral stage 14, whereas, in WT, the stamens were longer than the pistil and brushed against the stigma to allow pollination and fertilization.
The mutant has a 50% reduction in aliphatic suberin in young roots, and several fold reduction in aliphatic suberin monomers in seed coats. The seed coats are more fragile, have a darker appearance, and increased permeability to dyes. The mutant seeds have a reduced germination rate under high salt. The seedlings have lower tolerance to salt stress.
The mutant has a layer of deposited material on the surface of the distal region of the pollen grains.
The mutant has a wild-type appearance under normal growth conditions. Pyrimidine nucleotide and uridine levels are not changed in the mutant, but uracil levels are increased. These mutants can grow when uracil is provided as a sole nitrogen source.
The mutant has reduced sensitivity to methyl jasmonate in root growth inhibition experiements. It also produces lower levels of jasmonyl-isoleucine (JA-Ile) than wild-type plants in response to wounding.
The mutant has shorter siliques and a great reduction in seed production compared to wild-type plants. A much higher proportion of pollen grains have a collapsed appearance in the mutant than in wild-type plants. A GUS-based reporter assay does not reveal any difference in the somatic homologous recombination frequency between wild type and mutant plants. However, a similar assay shows that the mutants have a higher rate of homeologous somatic recombination than wild-type plants.
The mutant has slightly less branching of trichomes than in wild type.
The mutant has smaller rosette leaves and mature plants are not yellowish as has been reported for abal mutants.
The mutant initiates vegetative growth and the transition to the inflorescence meristem in the same manner as the wild-type, but produces extremely short flowering stems. This phenotype is primarily due to a reduced cell length in the internodes.
The mutant insertion line did not show any visible growth difference on soil or nutrient solution supplemented with nitrate or ammonium as the nitrogen source.
The mutant is defective specifically in the qE component of NPQ. However, it exhibites zeaxanthin synthesis in high light that is indistinguishable in extent and kinetics from that of the wild type.
The mutant is less affected by brassinolide than wildtype with regard to inhibition of root elongation.
The mutant is more tolerant to salt (NaCl) and osmotic (mannitol) stress than the wild type during germination and post-germination development, especially at high levels of the stresses.
The mutant is resistant to auxin.
The mutant is responsive to a vernalization treatment, the treated mutant plants flowering earlier than mutant plants not subjected to the vernalizaiton treatment.
The mutant is severely impaired in its ability to breakdown storage lipid. It has a much slower rate of postgerminative growth which can be rescued by providing sucrose to the mutant. In germinating seedlings, triacylglycerol content in the mutant only declined 20% of that in the wild type and clusters of oil bodies are seen in the mutant at this stage of development.
The mutant is still able to produce siliques and viable seeds.
The mutant is unable to grow in normal air. Primary leaves become chlorotic very soon after germination and the plants die within three weeks. Better growth was achieved by elevating the CO2 concentration to 0.3%, but near-to-normal growth rates require an even higher CO2 concentration (0.9%). Under these non-photorespiratory conditions, the knockout mutant flowers and produces seeds.
The mutant plants are hypersensitive to both FRc and Rc light treatments in hypocotyl elongation and exhibits a small reciprocal enlargement in cotyledon area, albeit not statistically significant.
The mutant plants are indistinguishable from the wild-type plants when grown in 1/2 strength Murashige and Skoog (MS) medium. However,  when exposed to salt stress, they exhibit increased salt tolerance.
The mutant plants exhibited increased tolerance to freezing.
The mutant plants showed an improved tolerance to the drought and cold.
The mutant plants treated with GA flowered earlier than the at prp39-1-1 plants without GA treatment and at similar times as wild-type plants without GA treatment.
The mutant primary roots grew much more slowly than those of the wild type. No differences between mutant and WT were seen regarding cellular organization or cell wall formation in the root apical meristem. However, a clear reduction in meristem size was detected. The root growth rate of the mutant was severely reduced and no acceleration of growth took place. The average mature cortex cell length was significantly (P < 0.001) reduced from 171 &mu;m in WT to 104 &mu;m in hub1-1, whereas the cell production per hour had decreased by 65%, from 1.26 in Ler to 0.44 in hub1-1.
The mutant produced no leaves, short roots  with short and swollen root hairs, chlorotic cotyledons that accumulated anthocyanins around their margins, and a short and swollen hypocotyl. In addition, the cotyledon-hypocotyl  junction was extremely fragile, which caused cotyledons to frequently fall off, even with gentle handling.
The mutant responds hypersensitively to red light but normally to far-red light for the inhibition of hypocotyl elongation.
The mutant seedlings display a marked attenuation of the maximal promotion of elongation by transient low R/FR and an increase in the magnitude of the growth inhibition caused by transient low R/FR at subjective dawn.
The mutants failed to elongate their telomeres, and exhibited a heterogeneous profile of TRF products similar to that seen in ku70 tert.
The mutants have defects in energy transfer within PSII or a partial loss of PSII capacity.
The mutant showed a strong reduction in germination under far-red light conditions.
The mutant showed cluster-like trichomes lacking additional branches.
The mutant showed only a slight reduction of germination compared with the WT in each treatment.
The mutant showed reduced secondary thickening of the hypocotyl, with a hypocotyl diameter of ~50% of that in the wild type at the same stage. The number of lignified xylem vessels and fiber elements was reduced in the hypocotyl of the mutant as well.
The mutant showed severe damage at a lower concentration of BASTA compared with WT Col-0 plants.
The mutant showed the same level of tolerance to both Cu<sup>2+</sup> and Zn<sup>2+</sup> as the wild-type control.
The mutant showed vegetative growth defects and sterility.
The mutant shows ABA insensitivity in stomatal movement, including promotion of stomatal closure and inhibition of stomatal opening. The detached leaves of the mutant lose more water than those of the wild-type plants under dehydration condition; both young seedlings and mature plants of the mutant have lower capacity to conserve water during drought stress in comparison with wild-type plants. The ROS levels increase in the mutant in comparison with wild-type plants in both the whole leaves and in guard cells. Treatment with low concentrations of ABA reduces ROS levels in both whole leaves(1 to 10 uM ABA application) and in guard cells(5 uM ABA application) in the mutant plants.
The mutant shows a reduction in ABA-responsive RD29A expression. In ggt1-1, expression of RD29A:LUC was approximately one-third of the wild-type level at 3 h after application of 100 &mu;M ABA.
The mutant shows dwarfed growth, supernumerary epinastically curled leaves, early senescence, and abnormal flowers with the gynoecium protruding from the unopened floral buds. However, the phenotypes seen in double mutant plants are more severe than those seen in ctr1. This becomes apparent at about two weeks after germination, except for the reduced root growth, which is already obvious at three days after germination. Moreover, unlike the ctr1 mutation that has a reduced transmission of the ctr1 allele relative to wild-type and infertile early flowers, the double mutants have a greatly reduced fertility but can readily be pollinated with wild-type pollen.
The mutant siliques contained a percentage of shriveled seed remnants, which manifested as gaps in the developing line of green seeds.
The mutants showed well-developed epidermal lobes and no significant difference with regart to the pavement cell complexity compared to wild type.
The mutant supports 5-fold more virulent bacterial growth, indicates the gene plays a role in basal resistance to virulent bacteria. The mutant also shows increased susceptibility (10-fold) to certain avirulent pathogens.
The mutants were indistinguishable from wild-type under normal growth conditions. However, when germinated in the dark, all three mutant alleles showed a slightly exaggerated response to ACC. Nevertheless, striking developmental alterations resembling those of the ctr1 mutants were observed.
The mutant was grown together with wild type for 38 days on  nutrient solution containing 2 mM ammonium nitrate before  it was subjected to nitrogen deficiency for another  4 days. In a concentration range of 3?200 &#956;M, urea influx into roots of the mutant plants was between 70 and 90% lower than in the  wild type.
The mutant was marginally less sensitive for red light in terms of hypocotyl elongation, but the mutant showed a strong defect in  red-light-induced cotyledon opening and greening.
The mutant was the most sensitive to high salt (NaCl) and osmotic (mannitol) stress in both germination rate and percentage of germinating seedlings turning green.
The mutant was visually indistinguishable from wild type when grown in potting mix. However, when grown on nutrient agar with a basal supply of Mn2+, the mutant accumulated more Mn2+ in shoots and roots (45-60% greater concentrations) than the wild type, whereas the concentrations of other mineral nutrients did not differ between the lines.
The mutation causes DNA hypermethylation in the promoter of several genes.
The mutation causes extra cells in the columella root cap and the QC.
The mutation did not affect pollen  formation, but resulted in the failure of pollen to germinate  in vitro and in vivo.
The mutation has no effect on the ability of preopened stomata to respond to light or CO2-free air but the mutant remain impared in the ABA-inhibition of light-induced stomatal opening.
The nad-me1.1 / nad-me2.1 double mutant has no detectable NAD-dependent malic enzyme activity. However, it appears to grow and develop normally and to have normal photosynthetic parameters. However, the levels of several metabolites, including fructose, galactose, sucrose, 2-oxoglutarate, succinate, fumarate, citrate, and several amino acids are altered in these double mutants relative to wild type plants. The metabolites affected differ depending on whether the analyses are done at the end of the day or end of the night.
The nad-me1.1 mutants appear to grow and develop normally and display normal photosynthetic behavior, however, the plants have a significant reduction in NAD-dependent malic enzyme activity.
The nad-me2.1 mutants appear to grow and develop normally and display normal photosynthetic behavior, however, the plants have a significant reduction in NAD-dependent malic enzyme activity.
The number of cells in epidermal-cell files was unaltered in the double mutant compared to prc1-1 hypocotyls.
The number of cotyledons varies from one to four (wild-type seedlings have two separated cotyledons), the size of which is reduced.  Displays premature termination of the shoot meristem.  Defective in root and embryo development.
The number of first whorl organs in the double mutant was slightly increased compared with ap2-2 single mutants. No second-whorl organs were present in the double mutant and the third and fourth whorls had an additive phenotype.
The number of lateral roots was reduced slightly in 7-d old  mutant seedlings compared to the wild type. Although exogenous auxin induced lateral root formation in mutant as in wild-type seedlings, there were fewer lateral roots in auxin-treated mutant than in the wild type.
The number of outer epidermal cells in mutant valves was smaller, causing a reduction in valve width.
The number of palisade cells across mutant lamina was 44% that of those in wild type, resulting in narrow leaf shape of the mutant. In addition to reduced cell numbers, distribution and size of the mesophyll cells were irregular with some enlarged cells and the air spaces were increased.
The occurrence (at 24 DAG) and progression (at 28 DAG) of senescence in mutant rosette leaves were not accompanied by a significant reduction in the amounts of nitrogen-containing compounds: nitrate, total amino acids, soluble proteins, and total nitrogen. By contrast, they were largely reduced in the wild-type plants.
The old5 mutant has almost a 3-fold reduction in its ability to stimulate the Cys desulfurase activity of Cp NifS. But, the quinolate synthase activity of the old5 mutant is not significantly different from the wild type level of activity, most likely because the QS domain is not the site of the mutation. Aspartate oxidase transcript levels are increased in the old5 mutant. And, NAD, NADH, NADP, and NADPH levels are also increased 27 days after germination. The activity of the NAD salvage pathway appears to be upregulated in this mutant. The level of several other metabolites, including those associated with the TCA cycle, are also altered in old5 mutants. The respiration rate of old5 is elevated compared to the respiration rate in wild type seedlings which leads to an increase in oxidative stress.
The only change in phenotype observed was a significant  bending of fruits, suggesting asymmetrically longitudinal  growth without any alteration in the fruit length.
The ots1-1 ots2-1 double mutant plants flower earlier than wild type plants under long days and short days. They do not differ notably from wild type plants with respect to their overall growth rate, inflorescence structure, or seedling primary root elongation rate. But, they are hypersensitive to salt based on root elongation assays. They also have a higher level of SUMOylated proteins than wild type seedlings exposed to salt stress.
The overall development is markedly delayed for the overall plants, but retardation of root growth is even more pronounced than that of shoot.
The overall growth of the xi-2 / xi-b double mutant is normal. In the leaf epidermis, Golgi stacks and peroxisomes move more slowly in these mutant cells than in wild-type cells. The rate of mitochondrial movement is also slightly reduced. Root hair length is reduced to ~15% of the wild type root hair length in these double mutants, but their root hair density is very similar to the wild type density.
The overall growth of the xi-k / xi-2 double mutant is normal. In the leaf epidermis, Golgi stacks, peroxisomes, and mitochondria move more slowly in these mutant cells than in wild-type cells. Root hair length is reduced to ~20% of the wild type root hair length in these double mutants, but their root hair density is very similar to the wild type density.
The overall response of cauline leaves and flowers to cytokinin treatments was similar in gis and control plants.
The paraclades had a highly penetrant defect that affected the first one or two internodes. These internodes were dramatically reduced in length, giving the appearance of leaves initiating in the axils of the cauline leaves. The internodes on the main stem between the paraclades also often were reduced in size.
The pattern of G6PDH activity is not altered in the mutant compared to wildtype; only a slight delay in increase of AGPase activity is detected.
The pedicels of flowers in pny were slightly shorter than those found in the wild type. Finally, flowers occasionally were aberrant, producing small, curved, club-shaped siliques at a low penetrance
The petioles of the rot3 mutant plants were shorter than those of the wild type.
The phenotype of the double mutant is most obvious at its seedling stage, with its most prominent phenotype being severely impaired  lateral root formation. Its primary roots fail to produce lateral roots in 2-week-old seedlings. However, double mutant seedlings start to generate several lateral roots after ~2 weeks of growth, and their morphological appearance is normal.
The phenotype of the parvus mutant is almost indistinguishable from that of wild-type plants when grown in vitro on agar. However, when grown in soil, parvus mutants are distinguished from wild-type plants after about 3 weeks due to their slightly narrower, darker green leaves.
The photosynthetic performance of the double mutant is identical to that of prpl11-1 plants (Fv/Fm, 0.69 versus 0.79 in the wild type; &Phi;II, 0.53 versus 0.75 in the wild type; 1-qP, 0.06 versus 0.05 in the wild type).
The phototropic response toward blue light in hypocotyls of double mutant seedlings is disrupted.
The plants took up TNT faster than 2,6-DNT. Over 99% of the initial concentration of TNT was removed by the plants after 1 d whereas 30% was removed for 2,6-DNT at the same period of time.
The pom1/eli1 double mutant was compromised in growth and the rate of development was slow relative to the single mutants. The pom1/eli1 double mutants had very small rosettes, and their leaves accumulated anthocyanins.
The poor induction of germination by red light relative to wild type is efficiently restored by fluridone treatment.
The primary roots of the mutant produce as many lateral roots as the wild type.
The proportion of 18:3 in the seed oil is decreased in mutant and there is a concomitant increase in the proportion of 18:1 compared with wild type.
The prr7 mutant phenotype in Rc was more dramatic in the phyA-101 background,  especially in the range from 0.1 to 10  &#956;mol?m-2?s-1. However, in FRc, phyA prr7  double mutant seedlings were indistinguishable from phyA seedlings.
The ptr1-1 mutant grows normally on soil and on AM medium. Its pollen tubes germinate and elongate normally on germination media and in the presence of 100uM alanyl-ethionine (Ala-Eth), a toxic dipeptide. Root growth of ptr1-1 mutants exceeds wild type root growth when Ala-Eth is present in the growth media. The dry weight of ptr1-1 mutants is lower than that of wild type plants when both are grown with Pro-Ala or Ala-Ala dipeptides as the nitrogen source.
The ptr1-2 mutant grows normally on soil and on AM medium. Its pollen tubes germinate and elongate normally on germination media. The tubes can germinate and elongate normally in the presence of 100uM alanyl-ethionine (Ala-Eth), a toxic dipeptide. Root growth of ptr1-2 mutants exceeds wild type root growth when Ala-Eth is present in the growth media. The dry weight of ptr1-2 mutants is lower than that of wild type plants when both are grown with Pro-Ala or Ala-Ala dipeptides as the nitrogen source.
The ptr1-2 ptr5-2 double mutant grows normally on soil and on AM medium. Its pollen tubes germinate and elongate normally on germination media. The tubes can germinate normally in the presence of 100uM alanyl-ethionine (Ala-Eth), a toxic dipeptide, but they elongate more than wild type pollen tubes.  Root growth of ptr1-2 ptr5-1 mutants exceeds wild type root growth when Ala-Eth is present in the growth media. The dry weight of ptr1-2 ptr5-1 double mutants is lower than that of wild type plants when both are grown with Pro-Ala or Ala-Ala dipeptides as the nitrogen source.
The ptr3-1 mutant has reduced germination on high concentrations of salt (140, 160, and 200 mM NaCl) compared to wild type seeds.
The ptr3-2 mutant has reduced resistance to Erwinia carotovora subsp. carotovora, a virulent necrotrophic pathogen and to Pseudomonas syringae  pv. tomato, a hemibiotrophic pathogen. But, this mutant is not more susceptible to the virulent necrotrophic pathogen Xanthomonas campestris pv. campestris. In addition, PR-1 is mildly less induced in response to  Pseudomonas syringae  pv. tomato DC3000 hrpA mutants in ptr3-2 plants than in wild-type control plants.
The ptr5-1 mutant grows normally on soil and on AM medium. Its pollen tubes germinate and elongate normally on germination media. The tubes can germinate normally in the presence of 100uM alanyl-ethionine (Ala-Eth), a toxic dipeptide, but they elongate more than wild type pollen tubes. Their roots can also grow normally in the presence of Ala-Eth. ptr5-1 mutants have a similar nitrogen content to wild type plants. ptr5-1 mutants and wild type plants have a similar dry weight when both are grown with Pro-Ala or Ala-Ala dipeptides as the nitrogen source.
The ptr5-2 mutant grows normally on soil and on AM medium. Its pollen tubes germinate and elongate normally on germination media. The tubes can germinate normally in the presence of 100uM alanyl-ethionine (Ala-Eth), a toxic dipeptide, but they elongate more than wild type pollen tubes. Their roots can also grow normally in the presence of Ala-Eth. ptr5-2 mutants have a similar nitrogen content to wild type plants. ptr5-2 mutants and wild type plants have a similar dry weight when both are grown with Pro-Ala or Ala-Ala dipeptides as the nitrogen source.
The pyd1-2 mutant has a wild-type appearance under normal growth conditions. Transcript levels for several genes involved in de novo pyrimidine biosynthesis are up-regulated in pyrd1-1 mutants. Transcripts for salvage pathway enzymes are also altered. Pyrimidine nucleotide and uridine levels are not changed in the mutant, but uracil levels are increased. The mutant has about a 40% decrease in uracil catabolism. These mutants can grow when uracil is provided as a sole nitrogen source.
The pyd2-1 mutant has a wild-type appearance under normal growth conditions. Pyrimidine nucleotide and uridine levels are not changed in the mutant, but uracil levels are increased. The mutant has about a 75% decrease in uracil catabolism. These mutants cannot grow normally when uracil is provided as a sole nitrogen source.
The pyd2-2 mutant has a wild-type appearance under normal growth conditions. Pyrimidine nucleotide and uridine levels are not changed in the mutant, but uracil levels are increased. These mutants cannot grow normally when uracil is provided as a sole nitrogen source.
The pyd3 mutant has a wild-type appearance under normal growth conditions. Pyrimidine nucleotide and uridine levels are not changed in the mutant, but uracil levels are increased. The mutant has about an 80% decrease in uracil catabolism. These mutants cannot grow normally when uracil is provided as a sole nitrogen source.
The randomization of hypocotyl growth orientation observed in WT that is induced through FR as a result of repression of gravitropism through phyA is enhanced in the phyB mutant.
The rate of 5-aminolevulinate (ALA) is one-third of that seen in wildtype, most likely reflecting feedback inhibition.
The rate of chlorophyll leaching from mutant plants was threefold higher than the rate from wild-type controls.
The rate of CO2 assimilation per unit leaf area is decreased about 40% compared to wildtype plants.
The rate of leaf primordial formation is slightly decreased but the phyllotaxy is normal.
The rate of water loss from the mutant is significantly higher than that of Col-0 plants.
There are no consistently detectable phenotypic differences between this double mutant and wild-type plants grown under normal conditions.
There are no detectable phenotypic differences between this mutant and wild-type plants grown under normal conditions
There are no detectable phenotypic differences between this mutant and wild-type plants grown under normal conditions.
There are no obvious defects in the aerial tissues, roots, or root hairs of xi-1 mutant plants grown under normal conditions. There are also no obvious defects in organelle trafficking, except for a slight effect on peroxisome movement. Double mutant analysis reveals a greater role for XI-1 in organelle movement and plant development (see xik-2/xi-1).
There are no obvious defects in the aerial tissues, roots, or root hairs of xi-b mutant plants grown under normal conditions. There are also no obvious defects in organelle trafficking. Double mutant analysis reveals a role for xi-b in root hair elongation (see xi-2/xi-b)
There are no obvious defects in the aerial tissues, roots, or root hairs of xi-b mutant plants grown under normal conditions. There are also no obvious defects in organelle trafficking. Double mutant analysis reveals a role for xi-b in root hair elongation (see xi-2/xi-b).
There are no obvious defects in the aerial tissues of xi-2 mutant plants grown under normal conditions. The root length of the mutant is also normal, but, it has shorter roots hairs than wild-type plants.
There are no obvious defects in the aerial tissues of xi-k mutant plants grown under normal conditions. The root length of the mutant is also normal, but, it has shorter roots hairs than wild-type plants.
There are no obvious defects in the aerial tissues of xi-k mutant plants grown under normal conditions. The root length of the mutant is also normal, but, it has shorter roots hairs than wild-type plants. There are decreased rates of movement of Golgi stacks, peroxisomes, and mitochondria in root hairs and leaves.
There are no obvious morphological defects in the drip1-1 mutant, but the drip1-1 drip 2-1 double mutant has altered gene expression levels and dehydration tolerance. In addition, higher levels of GFP-DREB2A protein are observed in drip1-1 mutants than in wild type seedlings transformed with the same construct.
There are no obvious morphological defects in the drip2-1 mutant, but the drip1-1 drip 2-1 double mutant has altered gene expression levels and dehydration tolerance.
The redox state of the plastoquinone pool, measured as 1-qP, was increased.
The reduction in seed-set in  the Atspo11-1-3 allele is more severe than in Atspo11-1-1.
There is no obvious aberrant phenotype in the plp3b-1 mutant. But, when this mutant is crossed with a 35S:PLP3a(RNAi) line defects in cytokinesis, cortical microtubule array formation, oriented cell growth, and maintenance of proper ploidy become apparent.
There is strong GUS staining in the ground tissue and quiescent center cells resulting from expression from the promoterless beta-glucuronidase reporter gene in the jkd-1 mutant. These mutants have ectopic periclinal divisions in the ground tissue.
The relative amounts of the PSII core subunits CP47, CP43, D1, and D2 is greatly reduced in the mutant, especially the PSII dimer.
The ren1-3 pollen grains sometimes develop moderately bublous tubes, but they are fertile (unlike the sterile pollen grains caused by the more severe alleles ren1-1 and ren1-2).
The responsiveness of the mutant to increasing fluence rates of Rc was essentially identical to  the wild type.
The rhf1a mutant does not have any visibly aberrant phenotypes, but, an rhf1a rhf2a double mutant reveals the role of these two proteins in gametogenesis and proteolysis.
The rhf2a mutant does not have any visibly aberrant phenotypes, but, an rhf1a rhf2a double mutant reveals the role of these two proteins in gametogenesis and protein degradation.
The root growth of mutant plants was inhibited after UV-B irradiation under both light and dark conditions. Mutant seedlings also were sensitive to gamma-rays and mitomycin C, which are known to inhibit DNA replication. Incorporation of bromodeoxyuridine after UV-B irradiation was less in rev3-1 than in the wild type.
The root lengths of 10-d pgp4-1 seedlings were 30% shorter than those of the wild type, and the number of lateral roots was also significantly reduced under moderate light levels (100 to 120 mmolm2s1) using sucrose concentrations of 0.5 to 1%. Under high light or on sucrose concentrations >1.5%, the root lengths and number of lateral roots observed were greater than or equal to those of the wild type. No obvious morphological differences between pgp4-1 and wild-type plants were observed in the aerial parts of seedlings and adult plants. Seedlings exhibited reductions in the rate  of root gravitropic bending.
The root lengths of 10-d pgp4 seedlings were 30% shorter than those of the wild type, and the number of lateral roots was also significantly reduced under moderate light levels (100 to 120 mmolm2s1) using sucrose concentrations of 0.5 to 1%. Under high light or on sucrose concentrations >1.5%, the root lengths and number of lateral roots observed were greater than or equal to those of the wild type. No obvious morphological differences between pgp4 and wild-type plants were observed in the aerial parts of seedlings and adult plants. Seedlings exhibited reductions in the rate of root gravitropic bending.
The root-meristem size of the double mutant was indistinguishable from that of the ahk3 mutant.
The root meristems of the mutant were indistinguishable from those of the wild type up to 4 dpg but became larger at 5 dpg and kept increasing in size thereafter.
The roots in mutants was more than ten-fold shorter in length than the roots in the wild-type (Col-0).
The roots of brxS seedlings are as short, both when grown in the light or in darkness. In contrast to the root system, the shoot system morphology and flowering time of brxS plants resembles the Sav-0 shoot system, which was used as the control. Cell elongation and cell production rate in the root meristematic and elongation zone were decreased in brxS seedlings, contributing approximately one-third and two-thirds, respectively, to the overall difference in root length as compared with Sav-0 seedlings.
The roots of this mutant show almost no sensitivity to the ethylene precursor ACC, but sensitivity is largely restored by the addition of low levels of IAA (but not tryptophan). ACC-triggered dark-grown apical hook formation is also compromised in this mutant, and it is not restored by the addition of IAA. Root gravitropism is more disrupted in this double mutant than in either single mutant. The mutant plants are shorter than wild type, have reduced venation in their leaves, exhibit reduced apical dominance, and produce abnormal flowers. DR5:GUS expression is also diminished in these double mutants, consistent with a ~50% reduction in IAA levels in these mutants. Root meristematic cells differentiate in this mutant, leading to a loss of the stem cell niche and the cessation of root growth.
The rosette leaf petioles of the triple mutant plants showed extensive ectopic outgrowth  formation in the marginal region, and  some outgrowths exhibited a strongly radialized character.
The rpa1a mutant has normal vegetative growth, but lower levels of fertility. Siliques are shorter in rpa1a mutants than in wild type plants, and their mean seed set per silique is reduced by ~68%. Pollen viability is also reduced in the mutants. Meiosis in pollen mother cells proceeds normally from early prophase I to the pachytene stage where full synapsis is observed, in the mutants. However, a reduced number of chiasmatas are detected in the mutants during chromosome condensation in late diplotene/diakinesis.Univalent chromosomes present at metaphase I cause mis-segregation at meiosis I and therefore, aneuploid tetrads are observed following meiosis II. There is no evidence of chromosome fragmentation in these mutants, suggesting that RPA1a is not required per se for the repair of double strand breaks during meiosis. There are no major defects in axis formation or synaptonemal complex formation in these mutants, nor are the number of MSH4 foci altered. However, there is a reduced number of MLH1 and MLH3 foci, suggesting that more recombination intermediates are repaired as non-cross-overs
The rpn10-1 mutant has defects in ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis via the 26S proteasome, rendering it more sensitive to misfolded proteins that are degraded in a 26S-proteasome / Ub-dependent manner. However, it has increased levels of the 20S core particle of the proteasome, and exhibits reduced sensitivity to oxidative stress, presumably since oxidatively damaged proteins can be degraded in a 20S proteasome-dependent, but 26S proteasome /Ub-independent manner.
The rpn10-1 mutant has defects in ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis via the 26S proteasome, rendering it more sensitive to misfolded proteins that are degraded in a 26S-proteasome / Ub-dependent manner. However, it has increased levels of the 20S core particle of the proteasome, and exhibits reduced sensitivity to oxidative stress, presumably since oxidatively damaged proteins can be degraded in a 20S proteasome-dependent, but 26S proteasome /Ub-independent manner. The mutation confers the same phenotypes in Col that were described in the C24 background.
The rpn10-1 mutant has elevated levels of ubiquitin conjugates but the RPN(1-186):ARP(exon2):NPTII protein is still detected in a 26S proteasome-enriched fraction. This mutant has a reduced germination rate, several growth abnormalities, increased rosette leaf senescence, a reduction in stamen number, increased sensitivity to DNA damaging agents, decreased sensitivity to cytokinin, and increased sensitivity to abscisic acid, sucrose, and salt.
The rpn12a-1 mutant has defects in ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis via the 26S proteasome, rendering it more sensitive to misfolded proteins that are degraded in a 26S-proteasome / Ub-dependent manner. However, it has increased levels of the 20S core particle of the proteasome, and exhibits reduced sensitivity to oxidative stress, presumably since oxidatively damaged proteins can be degraded in a 20S proteasome-dependent, but 26S proteasome /Ub-independent manner.
The rpn12a-1 mutant produces both the WT RPN12a protein and a RPN12a(1-186):ARP(exon2):NPTII fusion protein. The mutant form of the protein can coelute with subunits of the 26S proteasome from the regulatory and core particles and there is no increase in total steady state levels of ubiquitinated proteins in homozygous mutant seedlings. This mutant has seedling growth defects, elevated anthocyanin levels, abnormal leaf root development, delayed skotomorphogenesis, altered cytokinin responses, and reduced auxin sensitivity in their roots.
The rpt2a-2 mutant has modest defects in ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis via the 26S proteasome, rendering it somewhat more sensitive to misfolded proteins that are degraded in a 26S-proteasome / Ub-dependent manner. However, it also has modestly increased levels of the 20S core particle of the proteasome, and exhibits some reduced sensitivity to oxidative stress, presumably since oxidatively damaged proteins can be degraded in a 20S proteasome-dependent, but 26S proteasome /Ub-independent manner. The mutant has shorter roots than WT plants.
The SAM of the vcs-7 3-d-old seedlings varied: some were modestly rounded and layered, whereas others were more similar to the tdt embryonic SAM; however, none had leaf primordia.
The sco3-1 mutation alters chloroplast morphology and development, reduces chlorophyll accumulation, impairs thylakoid formation and photosynthesis in seedlings, and results in photoinhibition under extreme CO(2) concentrations in mature leaves.
These double knock-out mutants are thiamine auxotrophs that have a seedling lethal phenotype unless they are supplied with exogenous thiamine pyrophosphate (TPP) through a spray-based application. In addition, these mutants have 2-fold higher levels of thiamine and 32-fold lower levels of TPP than wild type plants.
These double mutants are hyposensitive to ABA in seed germination, post-germination development, root elongation, ABA-induced gene expression, and ABA-induced stomatal closure assays. However, they have a normal response to ABA in inhibition of stomatal opening assays. These mutants are smaller than wild-type plants and flower earlier. They have normal endogenous levels of ABA. No differences in the transcript levels of CHLH, FCA, or GCR2 are observed in these mutants compared to wild-type plants.
These double mutants have delayed flowering compared to wild type plants when grown under long day conditions. Analysis of growth under short day conditions indicates that these mutants are not disrupted in the photoperiod pathway. These double mutants also seem to be able to respond to vernalization signals and to gibberellin. But they have an impaired autonomous pathway to flowering. FLC transcripts are up-regulated in these double mutants through an unknown mechanism. The global level of asymmetric dimethylation of arginine 17 in histone 3 (H3)is reduced in these mutants. The transcript levels for several repressors of FLC do not seem to be altered in the double mutants, nor are there discernible changes in several types of H3 modifications at the FLC locus.
These mutant plants have reduced levels of gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase activity, especially in the roots, compared with wild-type plants.
These mutants fail to accumulate (E,E)-geranyllinalool and 4,8,12-trimethyltrideca-1,3,7,11-tetraene (TMTT) in response to a treatment with the octadecanoid mimic coronalon.
These mutants have shorter hypocotyls, shorter petioles, and more leaf area than wild-type plants when grown in low R:FR ratio light. They mutants have 60% of the free auxin normally found in wild-type mutants with a marked reduction in IAA synthesis rate under shade conditions. Microarray experiments indicate that following shade treatment, the sav3-2 mutant has 66 genes that are expressed at a lower level than in WT plants. Shade-induced expression of IAA19 and IAA29 is reduced in this mutant compared to wild-type plants, but the wild-type expression level can be restored with 1 uM IAA.
These mutants have shorter hypocotyls than wild-type plants when grown in low R:FR ratio light. sav3-1 mutants are shorter and have reduced leaf hyponasty compared to wild type plants when both are subjected to supplementary far red light. Shade-induced expression of IAA19 and IAA29 is reduced in this mutant compared to wild-type plants.
These mutants have shorter hypocotyls than wild-type plants when grown in low R:FR ratio light. Shade-induced expression of IAA19 and IAA29 is reduced in this mutant compared to wild-type plants.
These triple mutants do not make a primary root, they have an extremely reduced hypocotyl, and they lack discernable vasculature in their cotyledons. These mutants have a higher propensity to develop a single cotyledon than wild-type embryos.
These triple mutants do not make a primary root, they have an extremely reduced hypocotyl, and they lack discernible vasculature in their cotyledons. These mutants have a higher propensity to develop a single cotyledon than wild-type embryos.
The shoot apex and the very young emerging  leaves of homozygous progeny were pale green and their leaves turned chlorotic while growing. After 6 weeks on sucrose-containing agar, surviving mutant plants were able to produce an inflorescence; again, the young sepals of the flower were pale green and became white subsequently.
The shr-2 mutation strongly perturbs the specification of the  stele initials as well as the patterning of the stele tissues, and  notably the phloem and procambium tissues.
The siliques of self-pollinated heterozygous plants were examined. Dissected siliques showed a full seed set, indicating that the loss of VCR did not affect female gametophyte or embryo development.
The size and activity of the root apical meristem is decreased with respect to wildtype.
The skor-1 mutant is sensitive to toxic cations in addition to K+ depletion.
The stem vasculature in bop1 bop2 plants showed normal vein morphology.
The sterile ren1-1 pollen grains from this heterozygous plant germinate precociously at a higher rate than wild type pollen tubes, and they often form bulbous tubes that are incapable of adhering to or entering the stigma. The domain of ROP1 expression in the pollen tubes is expanded in these mutants. GFP:RIC4, which binds to the PM-localized active form of ROP1, is also visible across an abnormally broad area in the pollen tube tips of ren1-1 mutants.
The sterile ren1-2 mutant pollen grains from this heterozygous plant germinate precociously at a higher rate than wild type pollen tubes, and they often form non-functional bulbous tubes.
The stomatal index was consistently reduced in all hub1-1 when compared with Ler samples, suggesting that a proportion of leaf epidermal cells of hub1-1 exit the mitotic cell cycle early. The stomatal index (i.e., the fraction of epidermal cells that are guard cells) increased more slowly in hub1-1 than in Ler between 5 and 8 DAS, with final values of 0.23 and 0.35 on average for hub1-1 and Ler, respectively. As a result, in mature leaves of hub1-1, fewer stomata were present, a difference that originated at the same time when division rates were changed.
The style and developing silique of the flower of the homozygous progeny were pale green, whereas leaves and stem accumulated anthocyanin pigments.
The sugar content of leaves was substantially higher than that of the wild-type control. This was most pronounced at the end of the night, when glucose and fructose were almost ninefold higher in mutant than wild-type leaves and sucrose was more than twofold higher.
The suvh5 single mutant has no obvious morphological defects or changes in histone or DNA methylation patterning, due to redundancy with suvh4 and suvh6. The suvh4 suvh5 suvh6 triple mutant has no obvious morphological defects, but displays loss of  DNA methylation in non-CG sequence contexts similar to a cmt3 null mutant, and loss of both mono- and di-methylation of H3 K9 at heterochromatic sequences.
The T-DNA insertion prevents accumulation of the ATG5 mRNA in the mutants. Absence of 50-kD and a 40-kD proteins, which correspond to the sizes of the conjugate ATG12-ATG5 and the ATG5 proteins, respectively. Homozygous atg5-1 seedlings germinated and developed normally, and flowered and set seed at the same rate as wild-type plants under a long-day photoperiod (16h light/8h dark). Under a short-day photoperiod (8h light/16h dark), the atg5-1 plants grew slower resulting in smaller plants, flowered later than wild type with reduced fecundity, and showed enhanced senescence of rosette leaves. Hypersensitive to N-deficient growth conditions (mutants presented enhanced chlorosis of the cotyledons and reduced true leaf formation). Low recovery rates (20%) after restoration of N in the media, as compared to 100% recovery rates in wildtype. Hypersensitive to carbon starvation induced by darkness (plants become severely chlorotic and flaccid faster and protein loss was higher than in wild type). In C-starved plants the protein levels of ATG7 decreased and the ATG5 increased in the mutant, whereas the protein levels of ATG8 did not drop, but the ATG8 mRNA level increased, unlike in wild type.
The tgd4-1 plant is slightly pale green but  otherwise indistinguishable from the wild type.
The tgd4-3 plant is slightly pale green but  otherwise indistinguishable from the wild type.
The total amount of omega-hydroxylated fatty acids and their derivatives was reduced 4- to 5-fold in the mutant compared with Col-0. The impact of mutation on the amount of dicarboxylic acids, characteristic of Arabidopsis cutin, was particularly strong, and the amount was reduced to 15-20% of WT amount.
The total Chl content (Chla and Chlb) was decreased by about 25% compared to wild type.
The transcript levels of three UPR-related genes, BiP1, BiP2, and BiP3, are lower in zip28-1 mutant seedlings than in wild type seedlings following a UPR-inducing treatment with tunicamycin.
The transcript levels of three UPR-related genes, BiP1, BiP2, and BiP3, are lower in zip28-2 mutant seedlings than in wild type seedlings following a UPR-inducing treatment with tunicamycin.
The transgene-minus mutant plants did not produce any smRNAs, and showed a wild-type level of DNA methylation in the endogenous RD29A gene promoter.
The transheterozygote was indistinguishable from vcs-1; it produced green organs, a longer root, and leaves that expanded to become broad and pointed.
The transmitting tract of hec1 was  indistinguishable from that of wild type in size, staining intensity (Alcian Blue) and cytology.
The trichome production is most similar to that of the gis2 mutant on branches and cauline leaves, but glabrous flowers are produced .
The triple homozygous progeny does not germinate when untreated. However, when the seed coat of ungerminated seeds is removed under an optical microscope, the treated seeds germinate under continuous light for  3 days on an MS plate, and develop into seedlings.
The triple homozygous progeny has low viability, accumulated anthocyanin, and all plants died before shoot emergence.
The triple homozygous progeny is insensitive to GA.
The triple homozygous progeny showed very severe dwarfism, whereas the parental plants (Aabbcc) showed a weak phenotype.
The triple mutant displayed proliferating inflorescence meristems in positions that would normally be occupied by flowers. This phenotype is very similar to the ap1-1 cal-1 double mutant phenotype. However, the mutant formed a few flower meristems that produced  stamens and carpels. The triple mutant also showed increased levels of the FUL mRNA in the inflorescences  when compared with wild-type (five-fold) and the ap1-1 cal double mutant (two-fold).
The triple mutant had an approximately additive phenotype. They were bushy and displayed the reduced fertility of axr1-12 plants.
the triple mutant pollen grains are severely deformed, the pollen cell walls are unevenly deposited. The mutant pollen is not fertile.
The triple mutant showed enhanced drought tolerance versus WT plants, enhanced cell membrane integrity, increased anthocyanin biosynthesis, abscisic acid (ABA) hypersensitivity, and reduced stomatal aperture, but not to altered stomatal density.
The vacuoles of this mutant exhibit a substantially reduced capacity to import glucose.
The vascular patterning defects in the triple mutant leaf petioles were greatly enhanced compared with those of the parental plants.
The vascular transition is a region where the root-like vascular organization of the lower hypocotyl shifts to a shoot-like vascular organization. In tdt-1 mutants, this region ranged from being devoid of detectable xylem to containing xylem but with poorly aligned veins. This defect showed incomplete penetrance, but it was most prevalent when seedlings were germinated at higher temperatures.
The vasculature in more than half (55.9%) of kan1 kan2 leaf petioles exhibited a pattern of phloem surrounded by xylem, representing an adaxialized phenotype. However, very surprisingly, 17.6% of kan1 kan2 leaf petioles had abaxialized vasculature or a mixture of adaxialized and abaxialized vasculature.
The wall thickness of interfascicular fibers and vessels in the stems of the mutants was decreased by ~60% compared with the wild type, which is most likely the cause of their reduced stem strength.
The width of the true leaves of the mutants were similar to those of the wild type.
The wild-type SAM was similar in size and organ  phyllotaxy regardless of growth temperature. By contrast, the vcs SAM was smaller than the wild type; this defect was most severe in the 29?C-grown vcs plants, where the SAM appeared small and flat.
The wri1 has seed-specific phenotype, characterized by the wrinkledness of the seed and a strong reduction in the accumulation of seed oil. No striking differences between the wild-type and mutant plants were observed, in particular with respect to the number of siliques or seeds, a factor that could affect seed filling. Furthermore, the number of siliques per plant as well as the number of seeds per silique were not altered in the wri1 mutants. Early morphogenesis of the embryo as observed by light microscopy was indistinguishable in the mutants and the wild type, however, during the seed-filling stage triacylglycerols accumulated at a much lower rate in the mutant, and the final amount of triacylglycerols in mature wri1 mutant seeds was reduced by approximately 80%. The fatty acid composition of triacylglycerols extracted from mature wild-type and homozygous wri1 mutant seeds were different. There were only subtle differences in the time courses of protein accumulation during seed development between the mutants and the wild type. It appears that young mutant seeds contain more protein, whereas mature mutant seeds contain slightly less than wild-type seeds. Furthermore, the amounts of soluble sugars, including Suc, Glc, and Fru, were elevated throughout development of wri1 mutant seeds. Mature mutant seeds contained approximately twice as much Suc. However, developing homozygous wri1 seeds were impaired in the incorporation of sucrose and glucose into triacylglycerols; pyruvate and acetate were incorporated at an increased rate. Because the activities of several glycolytic enzymes, in particular hexokinase and pyrophosphate-dependent phosphofructokinase, are reduced in developing homozygous wri1 seeds, it is suggested that WRI1is involved in the developmental regulation of carbohydrate metabolism during seed filling.
The xi-k / xi-1 double mutant plants are shorter and have smaller rosettes than wild type plants. Their reduced leaf size results from decreased cell size and decreased cell number. These double mutants produce fewer seeds per silique than wild type plants. In the leaf epidermis, Golgi stacks, peroxisomes, and mitochondria move more slowly in these mutant cells than in wild-type cells. Root hair length is reduced to ~35% of the wild type root hair length in these double mutants, but their root hair density is very similar to the wild type density.
The xik-1 mutant has normal root growth, but its root hairs are only 49% of the length of wild type root hairs, and they have a hooked shape when grown on media with sugar. The stem trichomes are crooked and wavy and often have abnormally elongated stalks. The trichomes on the leaves also have size and shape irregularities. But, the total number of trichomes is the same for mutants and wild-type plants.
The xik-2 mutant has normal root growth, but its root hairs are only 50% of the length of wild type root hairs, and they have a hooked shape when grown on media with sugar. The stem trichomes are crooked and wavy and often have abnormally elongated stalks. The trichomes on the leaves also have size and shape irregularities.  But, the total number of trichomes is the same for mutants and wild-type plants.
The xik-3 mutant has normal root growth, but its root hairs are only 77% of the length of wild type root hairs, and they have a hooked shape when grown on media with sugar. The stem trichomes are crooked and wavy and often have abnormally elongated stalks. The trichomes on the leaves also have size and shape irregularities.  But, the total number of trichomes is the same for mutants and wild-type plants.
The youngest leaves are chlorotic.
The youngest part of the homozygous progeny are slightly green at the center of the seedlings.
thf1-1 Root Growth Is Hypersensitive  to Increased D-Glucose
thic1 mutants have white leaves and die as seedlings, but grow normally when supplied with exogenous thiamine. The thiamine content of thic1 mutants is significantly lower than in wild type seedlings.
thic1 mutants produce white leaves and die early unless they are grown with thiamine supplements. Total thiamine levels are reduced by roughly 60% in the thic1 mutant.
Thickening of the endothecium in rpk2-2 anthers was inhibited; this tissue remained as a thin  layer during stages 11-13.
thick floral stems; encodes a protein of the cytochrome P-450 family required for the regulated polar elongation of leaf cells.
Thin, small plants.
This allele has the same pattern of sterols and brassinosteroids as another weak allele: bri1-5.
This At5G45940 over-expression line had bigger plants with three times wider rosette.
This double knock-out mutant has a 60-70% overall decrease in cutin monomer content in leaf and stem. The plant grew slowly. The water loss rate for rosettes was 4-fold greater than wild type. The mutant has an increased sensitivity to fungal pathogen. Defects in stomata structure.
This double mutant has a lower chiasma frequency than either single mutant, but more chiasma than Atrpa1a/Atmsh4 or Atmsh4.
This double mutant has even lower fertility and shorter siliques than atrpa1 mutants. These mutants have a residual chiasmata frequency and distribution comparable to msh4 mutants.
This double mutant has shorter siliques than WT plants, and lower fertility. Approximately 60% of ovules abort the megagametophytic development process at the FG1 stage. Often, one of the megaspores that is supposed to degenerate remains visible in the rhf1a rhf2a megagametophyte for a prolonged period of time. Some of the mutants arrested at the two nucleate (F2) stage, whereas about 30% developed normal female gametophytes that could be successfully fertilized to produce viable seed. The pollen of the double mutant is largely defective with about 50-70% nonviability compared to ~0.5% nonviability for wild type pollen. The pollen for rhf1a rhf2a mutants appears to develop normally through PMI, but 30-40% of the pollen grain fail to undergo this mitotic division, and then, of those that did pass through, another 20-30% never go through the next round of cell division (PMII). The variety of different ploidy levels measured in generative cells arrested at the PMII phase indicate that they could be blocked at the G1, S, or G2. Levels of myc:KRP6 increase in the double mutant, suggesting that this protein is a putative substrate of this E3 ubiquitin ligase. And many of the aberrant phenotypes observed in the double mutant can be improved when KRP6 levels are decreased by RNAi.
This germplasm has no obvious developmental phenotypes.
This mutant and the ubc1 ubc3 double mutant flower at the same time as wild type plants, but a ubc1 ubc2 ubc3 triple mutant is dwarfed, sterile, and bushier than wild type plants.
This mutant can be chlorotic.
This mutant develops a lesion-mimic phenotype on the leaves similar to that of several acd1 mutants. The lesions occur in a development-related, light-dependent fashion, coinciding with the initiation of leaf senescence in the wild-type. Premature cell death was observed in the flowers. Sepals and petals started to degrade earlier than that of wild-type, resulting in flowers that fail to fully open. 40% of seeds aborts at an early stage of development.
This mutant does not differ visibly from a wild type plant when grown under normal conditions. A UV-B dose during the first week of growth on normal media affects the atrpa70b mutant and wild-type seedlings similarly, although the mutants have an increased level of leaf yellowing. After a longer period of exposure to UV-B, the level of chlorophyll A and B is reduced to a greater extent in rpa70b mutants than in wild-type, and root growth is more inhibited in the mutants. Treatment with MMS also causes a greater inhibition of root growth in rpa70b mutants than in wild-type seedlings. In contrast, the mutants show a wild-type level of sensitivity to H2O2 in root growth assays.
This mutant does not have any defects in vegetative development. Careful examinations of arr22-2 and wild type plants reveal no noticeable difference in chalazal cell morphology or size, embryonic development, silique dry weight, or silique inorganic ion, carbohydrate, or amino acid content.
This mutant does not have any defects in vegetative development. Careful examinations of arr22-3 and wild type plants reveal no noticeable difference in chalazal cell morphology or size, embryonic development, silique dry weight, or silique inorganic ion, carbohydrate, or amino acid content.
This mutant does not have any obvious morphological defects and it responds normally to ACC and IAA.
This mutant does not have any obvious morphological defects and it responds normally to ACC and IAA in hypocotyl and root elongation assays.
This mutant does not show any change in sensitivity to indole-3-butyric acid (IBA)(although a mutation in a closely related gene (IBR10 / At4g14430) does cause increased IBA resistance).
This mutant does not show any obvious abnormal growth or developmental phenotype.
This mutant exhibits ~50% of the Peronospora parasitica spore levels counted on rpp5 plants. This mutant is considered susceptible to infection.
This mutant exhibits low percentage of the Peronospora parasitica spore levels counted on rpp5 plants. This mutant is considered partially susceptible to infection.
This mutant flowers at the same time as wild type plants, but, a ubc1 ubc2 double mutant has accelerated flowering.
This mutant had a normal phenotype when grown under standard conditions. The chl/leaf area ratio in this mutant and WT plants were 18.1+/- 0.6 and 19.0 +/- 0.7 respectively. The average chl a/b ratios in this mutant and WT plants were 3.7 +/- 0.0 and 3.6 +/- 0.1 respectively. The levels of representative proteins from various complexes including photosystem (PS)I, PSII, and cytb6f were not altered cyp20-2 thylakoid membranes. However, there was a ~20% reduction in the amount of NDHH, a subunit of the NAD(P)H dehydrogenase complex. There was a slight increase in the photochemical efficiency of PSII in constant growth light conditions. An marker of NAD(P)H dehydrogenase-mediated reduction of plastoquinone in the dark, measured through the post-illumination rise in chl fluorescence, was also moderately decreased in this mutant.
This mutant had a normal phenotype when grown under standard conditions. The chl/leaf area ratio in this mutant and WT plants were 20.1+/- 0.8 and 19.0 +/- 0.7 respectively. The average chl a/b ratios in this mutant and WT plants were 3.7 +/- 0.0 and 3.6 +/- 0.1 respectively. The levels of representative proteins from various complexes including photosystem (PS)I, PSII, and cytb6f were not altered cyp20-2 thylakoid membranes. However, there was a ~20% reduction in the amount of NDHH, a subunit of the NAD(P)H dehydrogenase complex. There was a slight increase in the photochemical efficiency of PSII in constant growth light conditions and following a two-hour exposure to high light. An marker of NAD(P)H dehydrogenase-mediated reduction of plastoquinone in the dark, measured through the post-illumination rise in chl fluorescence, was also moderately decreased in this mutant.
This mutant has about 1/10 of the ornithine aminotransferase activity detected in wild type plants, but it has no other obvious phenotypic defects when grown under greenhouse conditions. In response to salt-stress, the mutant appears to produce wild-type levels of proline. However, unlike wild type seedlings, mutant seedlings cannot survive when arginine or ornithine is provided as the sole nitrogen source, implicating this enzyme in arginine catabolism.
This mutant has delayed flowering compared to wild type plants when grown under long day conditions.
This mutant has delayed flowering compared to wild type plants when grown under long day conditions. Analysis of growth under short day conditions indicates that these mutants are not disrupted in the photoperiod pathway. They also seem to be able to respond to vernalization signals and to gibberellin. But they have an impaired autonomous pathway to flowering. FLC transcripts are up-regulated and SOC1 transcripts are down-regulated in these mutants through an unknown mechanism. There are no discernible changes in several types of histone modifications examined at the FLC locus in this mutant background nor are there changes in transcript levels for several autonomous pathway genes.
This mutant has no visible phenotypic abnormalities.
This mutant has no visible phenotypic abnormalities when grown for seven weeks under long day conditions.
This mutant has responses to JA similar to coi1-1, except that it displays temperature-sensitive fertility and can be maintained as a pure breeding line.
This mutant is male gametophytic lethal.
This mutant is reported to have an embryo lethal phenotype in the homozygous state.
This mutant is severely stunted in growth. The seeds germinate at a rate comparable to wild type seeds but they begin to show aberrant phenotypes 3 to 4 days post-germination. Their cotyledons are paler and their primary roots are shorter than in wild type seedlings. The mutants have fewer chloroplasts per cell and the chloroplast differentiation seems to be delayed. They have fewer starch granules in their stroma. These mutants grow like wild type seedlings under dark-grown conditions. Light-grown pdtpi mutant tissue has roughly 40% less triose phosphate isomerase activity than comparable wild-type tissue. pdtpi seedlings also have elevated levels of glycerol, glycerol-3-phosphate, and dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) and reduced levels of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate. The level of methylglyoxal (MG) is doubled in mutant seedlings. Total lipid content is slightly reduced, but there are notable differences between various lipid components (e.g. MGDG vs. DGDG). Overall the changes in composition indicate an enhancement of the eukaryotic galactolipid biosynthesis pathway and a decrease in the prokaryotic pathway variant. DHAP and MG accumulation in the mutant may be responsible for many of the aberrant phenotypes.
This mutant lacks farnesol kinase activity, exhibits an enhanced response to ABA in seed germination assays, and develops supernumerary carpels under water-stress (drought-stress) conditions.
This mutant plant has reduced levels of gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT) activity, with the magnitude of reduction differing between organs. GGT is reduced by about 90% in leaves and flowers. These mutants are significantly smaller than wild-type plants and have higher levels of chlorosis.
This mutant was used to construct a quadruple mutant: amt1;1-1, amt1;2-1, amt1;3-1, amt2;1-1. When this qko (quadruple knockout) was compared with a triple knockout with WT AMT2;1, it provided little evidence for a role of AMT2;1 in ammonium uptake in Arabidopsis roots.
This triple mutant does not exhibit any obvious constitutive defense signaling phenotypes and it has normal fertility compared to wild-type plants. However, it has an enhanced relative oxidative burst compared to wild type plants in response to flg22, chitin, and the conserved elf18 epitope from a bacterial transcription factor. MPK3 transcripts remain elevated for longer in the mutant than in wild-type seedlings, though the MPK3 protein does not appear to have altered protein stability in this triple mutant.When challenged with the bacterial pathogen Pst, the triple mutant allows ~30 times less bacterial growth than wild-type plants. It is also less susceptible to a biotrophic oomycete.
Three- to tenfold higher cytokinin concentrations required to induce callus formation and growth. Shoot formation very rarely observed in double mutant explants.
Throughout the diurnal cycle, this mutant contains more starch than wildtype. Appreciable amounts of starch were however degraded during the night (67.5% of wildtype levels). Extending the night by 48h led to almost all the starch being remobilized.
tic-2 plants display a late flowering phenotype under LD (16/8). Leaf production is altered leading to a plastochron phenotype. The mutant has a slow growth rate and a deep green color of leaves due to an increase in chlorophyll levels . Starch metabolism is defective causing a starch excess phenotype, it also has alterations in other carbohydrates. tic-2 germination presents hypersensitivity to oxidative stress and ABA. Developed plants are drought tolerant.
Total lack of chiasmata.
Total loss of cytokinin-dependent chlorophyll retention in leaves (under dark conditions causing the so-called 'dark-induced senescence').
Total loss of detectable stachyose.
Treatment of hypocotyl segments of the mutant with auxin/cytokinin resuls in normal calluses development.
Treatment with  1 mM NADH promoted a small but significant increase in  germination of mutant seeds.
Trichome cells have shorter branches, reduced stalk length and width.  Epidermal pavement cells are less complex, with less lobing.  Root hairs are shorter and root hair vacuoles are fragmented.
Trichome production on the rosette leaves of double mutants was similar to that of spy-3 and wild-type plants, although abaxial trichomes appeared slightly later on rosette leaves, as in gis seedlings that were established on GA-containing medium. Double mutants had stem trichomes that were mostly three-branched, as in the gis mutants.
Trichomes are extremely reduced in size and have fewer branches. Also, fewer trichomes form along the margins of leaves.
Trichomes are irregularly expanded and distorted. Branch  lengths are significantly affected with all  three branches being significantly shorter than the respective branches of wild type trichomes.  Increased distance between first and second branch point as compared to WT.  Increased diameter at base of trichome.  Actn filaments in developing trichomes are generally more bundled  and more randomly distributed.  Increased root length.
Trichomes are less turgescent and are distorted with respect to the wild type.  Plants also have fewer root hairs with respect to wild type.
Trichomes have a short-stalk phenotype.
Trichomes have more branches than those of wild type plants.
Trichomes have one branch point resting on a long stalk.
Trichomes have only one branch point.
Trichomes have two branch points.
Trichomes have two or three branch points.
Trichomes not only have a reduced number of branches, but also have a much shorter stalk.
Trichomes of mutant undergo primary but not secondary branching.
Trichomes show strikingly different proportions with a long stalk and two short branches. The branch point is slightly lower than the secondary branch point in wild type but significantly higher than in an mutants. The two branches are arranged with an angle of 85 degrees. No obvious orientation of the two branches relative to the leaf axis is observed.
Trichomes with reduced DNA content.
Triple mutant enhances the floral meristem defects of clv1-11 single mutant. Novel phenotypes include the existence of an enlarged indeterminate meristem in the center of each flower. Leaves are smaller and number of rosette leaves is increased.
Triple mutant shows greater suppression of the clv3-2 with approximately 4.3 carpels per flower compared to clv3-2 single mutants which have approximately 6.7 carpels per flower.
trn2-23010 clv3-2 double mutant flowers also exhibited an additive phenotype not observed in single clv3-2 or trn2-23010 plants: double mutant flowers had reduced organ numbers in sepal, petal and stamen whorls, reminiscent of trn2-23010 single mutant flowers and in contrast to clv3-2 single mutant flowers, there was no increase in the number of stamens. However, in the fourth whorl, where trn2 loss-of-function interferes with the fusion of two carpels to the single style, double mutant flowers were comprised of multiple carpels, most of them fused (73%) as typically found in the clv3-2 mutation. Supernumerary stem cells in clv3-2 mutant floral meristems therefore not only led to the initiation of multiple carpels in the trn2 background but also favoured their fusion to a single style which remained severely twisted. In addition to a style consisting of multiple carpels, over-proliferating callus-type tissue was observed at the tip of the style in all flowers.
tso2-1 rnr2a-1 seedlings  did not develop beyond the two- to four-leaf stage. Their SAMs were terminated with callus-like cells, and their leaves exhibited massively. Exhibited significantly increased sensitivity to UV-C light.
tun-1/TUN heterozygous mutants 12% of ovules are unfertilized. In unfertilized ovules the pollen tubes overgrow in the FG, and do not rupture. Pollen development is normal but tun-1 pollen tubes rupture shortly after germination.
Twenty-five percent of embryos show abnormal cell divisions during embryogenesis-large cells- decreased rate of cell division. Division of the hypohyseal cell abnormal leading to abnormal placement of the root pole. Homozygotes show delayed flowering, abnormal floraly phyllotaxy and abnormal ovules.
Twisted leaves, reduced fertility, short stamens,dwarf stature, closed flower buds (no anthesis), anthers do not dehisce, short stems.
Two fold reduction of the miRNAs amiR-triOX.
twofold to threefold  reduction in the growth of the bacterial pathogen PstDC3000
Two singlet O2-induced visible stress reactions were observed in mutant plants after a dark-to-light shift: a cell-death response and the rapid inhibition of growth.
Two- to three-fold fewer of the endogenous PDS mRNA than in the wild-type plants and 10- to 50-fold higher levels of PDS siRNA.
Two- to three-fold increase of concentrations of all zeatin metabolites.
Typically, do not survive for longer than 3-4 weeks even under the non-photorespiratory growth conditions of 0.9% CO2 in combination with low light intensity.
Typical mutant phenotype of demethylation.
Typical weak allele of the class: between 3 and 6 cm in height at 5 weeks of age, resemble wildtype in colour; reasonably fertile although not as fertile as wildtype.
ubp15-1 mutants exhibit several anatomical defects related to leaf, root, flower, stem, and silique development. Notably, rosette leaves are narrow and serrated. An examination of ubp15-1 leaf cross-sections reveals a reduction in the number of adaxial epidermal and palisade cells spanning the width of the leaf. ubp15-1 mutant leaves also have fewer spongy cell layers than wild type leaves. The aberrant phenotype of this mutant is exacerbated when it is crossed with ubp16-1.
Unable to grow following germination on nutrient medium in the dark. Unable to grow in the light on growth medium. The mutant seeds germinated, but growth was arrested right after some root elongation and emergence of small cotyledons. The small cotyledons failed to green and the seedlings eventually died. The mutants could however be recovered on soil. Under long day conditions (16 hour light), the mutants had a reduced number of rosette leaves. The leaves were pale green and distorted. Bolts were shorter. After bolting, the plants were highly branched and semi-dwarf under all light conditions. Few seed setting.
Unable to grow following germination on nutrient medium in the dark. Unable to grow in the light on growth medium. The mutant seeds germinated, but growth was arrested right after some root elongation and emergence of small cotyledons. The small cotyledons failed to green and the seedlings eventually died. The mutants could however be recovered on soil. Under long day conditions (16 hour light), the mutants had a reduced number of rosette leaves. The leaves were pale green and distorted. Bolts were shorter. After bolting, the plants were highly branched and semi-dwarf under all light conditions. Few seeds setting.
Unable to grow with 10 mM allantoin as the sole nitrogen source.
Unbranched trichomes.
Uncoupling of growth and pattern formation in early embryogenesis. Patterning is delayed by several days, after which radial patterning beings in a remarkably normal manner.
Under a short-day regime, athb1-1 mutants developed shorter hypocotyls than WT seedlings. Under long-day conditions, no significant differences were detected between the genotypes.
Under a short-day regime, athb1-2 mutants developed shorter hypocotyls than WT seedlings. Under long-day conditions, no significant differences were detected between the genotypes
Under both FRc and Rc conditions, the length of mutant hypocotyls and cotyledon area are similar to that of wild type.
Under cold-shock conditions, maltose levels remained unchanged compared to wildtype plants.
Under cold treatment (24h), the decrease in glucose and fructose content in leaves is more drastically reduced compared to that of wild type and even that of the tmt1 single mutants.
Under conditions of low boron, nip6;1-1 mutants have smaller, darker green, and more irregularly shaped young rosette leaves than wild type plants. These leaves have smaller cells and lack intercellular air spaces. Lower boron levels accumulate in these young rosette leaves and in stems with shoot apicies when nip6;1-1 mutants are grown under low boron conditions, but, wild type levels of boron accumulate when these plants are grown with sufficient boron. Even under low boron conditions, there are no significant differences in boron levels between wild type and mutant plants in mature leaves. In addition, under normal boron conditions, the leaves of nip6;1-1 mutants grow normally and accumulate wild type levels of boron.
Under conditions of low boron, nip6;1-2 mutants have smaller, darker green, and more irregularly shaped young rosette leaves than wild type plants. These leaves have smaller cells and lack intercellular air spaces. Lower boron levels accumulate in these young rosette leaves and in stems with shoot apicies when nip6;1-2 mutants are grown under low boron conditions, but, wild type levels of boron accumulate when these plants are grown with sufficient boron. Even under low boron conditions, there are no significant differences in boron levels between wild type and mutant plants in mature leaves. In addition, under normal boron conditions, the leaves of nip6;1-2 mutants grow normally and accumulate wild type levels of boron.
Under conditions of low boron, nip6;1-3 mutants have smaller, darker green, and more irregularly shaped young rosette leaves than wild type plants.
Under constant red-light conditions, the hypocotyl length of the double mutant was intermediate to that of the parental single mutants.
Under continuous light the mutant plants grew equally well compared to wild type and finally reached the same height.
Under FRc conditions, the length mutant hypocotyls is decreased compared to that of wild-type plants.  Under Rc conditions, the hypocotyl length and cotyledon area is similar to that of wild type.
Under FRc conditions, the length mutant hypocotyls is decreased compared to that of wild-type plants.  Under Rc conditions, the hypocotyl length is also decreased and the cotyledon area is larger.
Under FRc conditions, the length mutant hypocotyls is decreased compared to that of wild-type plants.  Under Rc conditions, the hypocotyl length is decreased and the cotyledon area is similar to that of wild type.
Under FRc conditions, the length mutant hypocotyls is decreased compared to that of wild-type plants.  Under Rc conditions, the hypocotyl length is decreased and the cotyledon area is smaller than that of wild type.
Under FRc conditions, the length mutant hypocotyls is increased compared to that of wild-type plants.  Under Rc conditions, the hypocotyl length is also increased and the cotyledon area is smaller.
Under FRc conditions, the length mutant hypocotyls is increased compared to that of wild-type plants.  Under Rc conditions, the hypocotyl length is increased and the cotyledon area is larger than that of wild type.
Under FRc conditions, the length mutant hypocotyls is similar to that of wild-type plants.  Under Rc conditions, the hypocotyl length is decreased and the cotyledon area is similar to that of wild type.
Under FRc conditions, the length mutant hypocotyls is similar to that of wild-type plants.  Under Rc conditions, the hypocotyl length is decreased and the cotyledon area is smaller.
Under FRc conditions, the length mutant hypocotyls is similar to that of wild-type plants.  Under Rc conditions, the hypocotyl length is increased compared to wild type and the cotyledon area is smaller.
Under FR-light, the cotyledons are unfolded, a partially unfolded hook, no significant anthocyanin accumulation and greening are observed.
Under high fluence light (33.3 and most evidently 112.5 micromol/m2/s), displayed statistically significantly longer hypocotyls than did WT seedlings.
Under high light conditions (approximately 200 &mu;E.m-2.sec-1), CPTA-treated seedlings were completely photobleached and mutants showed rescue of both leaf and root development. Under moderate (approximately 100 &mu;E.m-2.sec-1) and low (30 &mu;E.m-2.sec-1) light intensities, seedlings are incompletely photobleached, but leaf and root development continue to show partial rescue.
Under hourly R pulses, the pks mutation also had no effect in the phyA background.
Under LD conditions, the flowering time of ath1-1 is  indistinguishable from that of wild-type Col-8. In  contrast, under SD conditions, ath1-1 plants flower with  approximately 20% fewer leaves than wild-type controls.
Under limited phosphate, primary root elongation is retarded and lateral roots are longer with respect to wild type.
Under long-day conditions, all the developmental phases  of the drm1 mutant are severely retarded, and a period of  109 d is needed from sowing to flowering compared to 42  d for the wild type. Its germination  rate is significantly lower and its germination speed  is 3-4 d slower compared to the wild-type. drm1 produces significantly more inflorescences, but fertility is severely reduced due to unusual shorter stamens. Mutants also have abnormal numbers of petals (5 or 6) and stamens.
Under long-day conditions, atmpk10 mutants are delayed in bolting and flowering. Cotyledons are narrow and have reduced vein complexity.
Under long-day conditions, mutant plants flowered 3 d earlier than wild type.
Under long-day conditions, mutant plants flowered 8 d later than wild type.
Under long day conditions, the size of atsdc-1 seedlings was much smaller than that of the wild type and the mutant never reached the height of the mature wild type. Mutant was sterile and had multiple inflorescences. Under short day conditions, atsdc-1 flowered earlier than the wild type and smaller size and multiple inflorescence defects in the mutant could be rescued.
Under long-day or continuous light conditions, wild-type plants and the mutant flower after producing approximately seven rosette leaves and growing for 3 to 4 weeks. However, under short-day conditions, wildtype plants produce more than 40 rosette leaves and grow  for ~75 days before flowering, whereas the mutant line continues to produce only seven rosette leaves and flower earlier  than the wild-type plants.
Under long days, suf3 showed much earlier flowering than  wild-type Col:FRISF2 and similar flowering time to Col, which has  a fri FLC genotype. Delay in flowering under short days, similar to Col. Much stronger  acceleration of flowering by vernalization than Col. Consistently produced  serrated leaves starting from the sixth leaf and approximately twice as many coflorescence  shoots as Col. Occasionally, secondary shoot apices converted to terminal flowers after producing racemic inflorescences, as well as produced flowers with extra petals.
Under low temperature growth conditions (12C with continuous low light) comparison of SALK_087789C to Columbia wildtype resulted in significantly more rosette growth in the mutant (P<0.0001; rosette diameter  3.07cm:2.38cm).
Under microscopic analysis, it was estimated that the hypersensitive response was disable by ~95% of pathogen inoculation sites in the mutant.
Under moist-chilled (stratified) conditions, mutant seeds showed  a slightly retarded germination,  but there was no difference in the final percentage germination. However, in the absence of a moist  chilling pre-treatment (non-stratified), germination was delayed  and the germination potential of mutatn seeds was  significantly lower than that of Ws, indicating a  hyperdormant phenotype.
Under natural light, the pip5k4 mutant exhibited delayed  stomatal opening, and this phenotype was  confirmed by performing a stomatal opening test in the dark  or under white light irradiation. At the beginning  of the photoperiod (T = 0 h), the apertures of pip5k4 stomata  did not differ significantly from WT, whereas after  3 h of illumination with 170 &#956;mol m-2 sec-1 white light, the  mean aperture size of pip5k4 stomata (2.78 &#956;m) was  significantly smaller than that of WT.
Under non-limiting conditions of light, water, and mineral nutrition, the growth and development of these plants is unaffected when compared to wild-type Col8 plnats.  No signs of seed abortion are detected in the siliques of heterozygous or homozygous plants.
under normal conditions, hsa32-1 plants  exhibited no obvious phenotypic difference in terms of germination time and rate, growth  rate, time to flowering, and seed yield as compared to the wild type.  The acclimation treatment (37oC for 1 h, recovery for 2 h at 22oC) led to enhanced tolerance of a similar level in the wild  type and hsa32-1 against the HS challenge at 44oC up to 220 min, but both  lines were killed at 44oC for 250 min. However, a great loss of thermotolerance was observed in the mutant if  the challenge was applied after 48 h or 72 h of recovery.
Under normal growth conditions, hesp mutant plants possess not only higher Phi(PSII) than wild type plants, but also a higher oxidized redox state of QA, which reduced significantly NPQ. Mutants also have altered expression of CCA1, TOC1 and LHY.
Under normal growth conditions, mature phyB-10 mutant plants have less leaves compared to wild-type plants and the mutant leaves exhibit elongated petioles and a reduced leaf blade surface. Furthermore, mature phyB-10 mutant leaves have a reduced chlorophyll content compared to wild-type leaves, but when partially shaded, mature phyB-10 leaves exhibit leaf yellowing to the same extent as the wild-type. For more information on this line, see the original report by Aukermann et al 1997, doi: http:/&#8203;/&#8203;dx.&#8203;doi.&#8203;org/&#8203;10.&#8203;1105/&#8203;tpc.&#8203;9.&#8203;8.&#8203;1317
Under normal growth conditions, phyA-211 mutant plants are indistinguishable from wild-type plants. However, when partially shaded to very low light intensities, but not darkened, mature leaves of phyA-211 show an enhanced rate of leaf yellowing compared to wild-type plants. For more information on this line, see the original report by Reed et al 1994, doi: http:/&#8203;/&#8203;dx.&#8203;doi.&#8203;org/&#8203;10.&#8203;1104/&#8203;pp.&#8203;104.&#8203;4.&#8203;1139 (PMID:12232154)
Under normal growth conditions, phyA-5 mutant plants are indistinguishable from wild-type plants. However, when partially shaded to very low light intensities, but not darkened, mature leaves of phyA-5 show an enhanced rate of leaf yellowing compared to wild-type plants. For more information on this line, see the original report by Aukermann et al 1997, doi: http:/&#8203;/&#8203;dx.&#8203;doi.&#8203;org/&#8203;10.&#8203;1105/&#8203;tpc.&#8203;9.&#8203;8.&#8203;1317
Under normal growth conditons, phyA-5 phyB-10 double mutant plants have less leaves compared to wild-type plants and the double mutant leaves exhibit elongated petioles and a reduced leaf blade surface. Furthermore, mature leaves of phyA-5 phyB-10 double-mutant plants have a reduced chlorophyll content compared to either wild-type and single mutant plants and, when partially shaded, exhibit an enhanced leaf yellowing. For more information on this line, see the original report by Aukermann et al 1997, doi: http:/&#8203;/&#8203;dx.&#8203;doi.&#8203;org/&#8203;10.&#8203;1105/&#8203;tpc.&#8203;9.&#8203;8.&#8203;1317
Under normal growth temperature conditions, the double mutant leaves' content in glucose and fructose is slightly reduced (~30%) in a similar fashion to that observed with the tmt1 single mutants.
Under normal temperature conditions, a substantial reduction in glucose and fructose contents in leaves is observed compared to wild type, and even the single tmt1 and double tmt1/tmt2 mutants.
Under optimal greenhouse conditions, the size and growth rate of the mutant were reduced by up to 75% relative to wild-type. Furthermore, an average delay of about 5 days in flowering time was observed for mutant plants.
Under Pi starved conditions, reduced DGDG content is observed, the proportion of phosphatidylethanolamine and phosphatidylcholine increased approximately two-fold in shoot and large differences in fatty acid compositions of galactolipids are seen in shoots and particularly roots. Under these conditions, the fresh weight of shoots and roots was reduced.
Under red and far-red light growth conditions, mutant plants have larger than normal cotyledons.
Under short-day conditions, the nst1-1 nst3-1 plants were no longer able to remain upright when they reached >15cmin height neither lignin nor cellulose, which constitute secondary walls, was produced in inflorescence stems of nst1-1 nst3-1 plants,
Under standard growing conditions (22?C), only the first three flowers of the double mutant were affected. These flowers had a reduced number of organs. In particular, this reduction concerned the second and third floral whorls that produced three petals and five stamens, whereas wild-type Arabidopsis thaliana flowers have four petals and six stamens. Furthermore, some flowers showed homeotic conversion of sepals into petaloid organs.
Under the reported growth conditions, approximately 10% of the dark germinated seedlings of the mutant produced true leaves. The dark germinated seedlings of the mutant did not show further growth even after a prolonged period of darkness.
unfused carpels; partially female sterile; partial homeotic transformation from sepals to carpaloid or staminoid sepals in whorl 1; petals and stamens reduced in number; narrow leaves and floral organs; enhances apetala2 characteristics; negatively regulates agamous expression in whorl 1 and whorl 2; alters expression patterns of apetala1, apetala3, agamous and pistillata
Unfused carpels did not form siliques later during development. In contrast, the remaining flowers with fused carpels developed siliques which were twisted and failed to fully elongate.  However, these siliques produced no fertile seeds and reciprocal crosses with wild type plants revealed nonfunctionality of both male and female reproductive organs.
Uniform yellow phenotype as a young seedling. Subsequent growth on sucrose media result in the appearance of light green, non-variegated leaves. Mutants display altered editing of various chloroplast cytidine targets in RNA.
Unless the pdx2 plants were continuously watered with vitamin B6, they became chlorotic and died.
Unlike previous reports from RNAi lines, the complete knockout of tip1;1 in this transposon insertion line did not have any observable phenotype. The mutants didn't suffer from carbon imbalance or general stress symptoms. Double knockout mutants of tip1;1 and tip1;2 didn't show changes of water balance either. The double mutants only had a minor increase of anthocyanins and a minor decrease of catalase activity.
Unlike the agl24-2 svp-41 double mutant, where severe phenotypes similar to the lug mutant were only observed when plants were grown at 30?C, in the ap1-12 agl24-2 svp-41 triple mutant, severe lug-type phenotypes were observed under normal growing conditions (22?C).
Unlike wildtype, germination of mutant seedlings was severely reduced when grown on sorbitol-containing media. Plants become increasingly chlorotic in corrolation with the sorbitol concentration.
Unlike wild type, mutant seedlings in higher light conditions (12 &mu;mol.m-2.sec-1) respond to increasing concerntrations of benzylaminopurine (BAP). At lower light intensities or in darkness, cytokinins caused identical growth inhibition in both wild-type and double mutant seedlings.
Unlike wild-type leaves, which had flat surfaces, the ventral (abaxial, lower) epidermis of mutant leaves was uneven and corrugated.
Unresponsive to GA treatment.
Unresponsive to GA treatment in leaf expansion or stem growth.
Unstressed leaves contain ~20 to 25% of wild type levels of ABA.
Unusual gynoecium and floral patterning defects,  including an increased number of sepals and carpels.
Upon treatment with paraquat (an inducer of reactive oxygen species), the leaves of the mutant develop a purple colour (flavonoid anthocyanin) on their abaxial surfaces.
Up to 20% of mutant buds remain closed when the rest of the flowers have initiated seed development. These unopened buds display abnormalities in stamen and gynoecium development.
urm23 enhances the hypomorphic gl1-2 allele and results in almost complete glabrousness (loss of trichomes) in normal growth condition. urm23 gl1-2 double mutant does not increase trichomes at all in response to wounding or methyl jasmonate treatment. urm23 is dominant in gl1-2 background. gl1-2 is incompletely dominant in urm23 background.
urm23 mutant leaves produce almost normal trichomes with slight clustering phenotype. Neither root hair patterning, anthocyanin (flavonoid) biosynthesis, nor seed coat mucilage production are affected in urm23, distinguishing this allele from all other known ttg1 alleles.
urm9 enhances the hypomorphic gl1-2 allele and results in almost complete glabrousness (loss of trichomes) in normal growth condition. urm9 gl1-2 double mutant shows strong, but not complete, defect in wounding and jasmonate-induced increase of trichomes. GL3-GFP fusion protein is mis-localized in a subset of urm9 gl1-2 epidermal cell nuclei. urm9 is recessive in gl1-2 background. gl1-2 is incompletely dominant in urm9 background.
urm9 mutant leaves produce fewer trichomes than wild-type (ca. 30% reduction). Morphology and branching number of urm9 trichomes are normal.
Using the monoclonal antibody CCRC-M1, specific for &#945;-L-fuc<i>p</i>(1->2)-&#946;-D-Gal<i>p</i> side chains, swollen trichoblasts were not stained while atrichoblasts and non swollen trichoblasts were. All cell types were stained in wildtype. Staining was restored when the mutant was grown on 10mM D-galactose.
UVB hypersensitive, defective in DNA damage response.
Vacuolar invertase (VacINV) activity was the same in the unwounded or wounded leaves of the mutant, however, cell wall invertase (cwINV) activity, which was 50-70% of that of wild type leaves in unwounded plants, was completely abolished in the mutant.
variegated
variegated.
Variegation caused by var2 single mutant is suppressed.
various epidermal defects, including disorganization of epidermis-related tissues, defects in the leaf cuticle and the fusion of organs.
Vascular defects in tdt mutants were also similar to those of vcs-7 in that cotyledon secondary veins mostly failed to form  closed loops.
Vegetative and reproductive growth are greatly reduced with respect to wild type. Pale reticulate leaf phenotype.  Double mutants are self-sterile due to failure to produce pollen grains.
vegetative development, normal; floral development, normal; seed, present in fewer numbers in organism; multipolar spindle observed in meiosis; male fertility, reduced; female fertility, reduced; no pollen grains from mutant anthers adhere to the stigma; ovule development, aborted after female meiosis; embryo sac, degenerate; spore formation, abnormal; anther development, defective, no detectable difference was observed between the mutant and the wild type during stages 1 to 6; significant aberrations were observed from stage 7 onwards in the mutant plants; tetrad formation, abnormal; formed polyads containing 4 to 8 spores; chromosome segragation, aberrant; chromosome segragation prophase I, normal; aberrant chromosome arrangements at metaphase II and abnormal separation (tripolar and unbalanced sepraration) in anaphase II; multipolar chromosome segregation at anaphase I of female meiosis; spindle organization at meiosis, abnormal;
Vegetative development appeared normal in pny plants.
Vegetative growth of the mutant appears to be comparable with wild type for plants grown in soil, although the mutant has flowers with smaller petals and reduced fertility.  The abnormal flower phenotype has been reported to occur in a fraction of the transgenic plants derived from the Madison collection, and is thought to be linked to the presence of an AP1 sequence in the T-DNA.
vernalization insensitive, failed to flower rapidly after a vernalization treatment; delayed flowering without a vernalization treatment; darker green leaves with shorter petioles; compact rosette; wider and slightly downward curling leaves
Very low sinapic acid:UDP-glucose glucosyltransferase activity in the mutant leaves compared to that of wild type.
Very rapid initial induction of non-photochemical quenching (NPQ) but NPQ level was greatly reduced compared to wildtype levels and all other genotypes.
Very reduced leaf size.Leaf shape resembles that if ssrp1-2 single mutant.Earlier flowering than either single mutant.
Very sensitive to high light stress. When exposed to high light at low temperature,most of the mature leaves of npq1 vte1 bleached in contrast with wild-type, npq1, or vte1 leaves, which did not exhibit visual symptoms of oxidative stress.
Very short internodes along the inflorescence. Wider leaves than wildtype.
Very strong decrease in trichome production on flowers but only a small decrease on branches and cauline leaves, which was only noticeable on the third paraclade.
Very strong embryo defects were observed in homozygous axl-1 plants segregating the axr1-12 mutation.
Viability depends on the ability to develop adventitious root before plant dies.
Viable, pale green phenotype. 40% of WT Chl levels.
Viable and fertile under described growth conditions.
viable but completely sterile; exhibits fragmented chromosomes during mitosis and sensitivity to camptothecin.
Virescent phenotype and impaired starch accumulation.
Virtually lacks lutein and accumulates high levels of zeinoxanthin (&#946;,&#949;-carotene with a hydroxylated &#946;-ring) and elevated levels of zeaxanthin, antheraxanthin, violaxanthin and neoxanthin (&#946;,&#946;-xanthophylls).
Visually WT. However, accumulates significantly less Chl levels than WT.
Wang et.al.(2014) reported recovery only of heterozygotes for kin-1c. Among those populations they did not detect any Kin1 mRNA suggesting that the WT allele was silenced. Heterozygotes had reduced fertility with 43% aborted seeds.
Water-soluble glycans are composed of very short malto-oligosaccharides made of 80% maltose, 14% maltotriose and 6% glucose.
Wavy and branched hairs
Weak allele specifically affecting petal development.
Weak allele with similar phenotype as that of <i>bri1-5</i> and <i>bri1-6</i>.
Weak distorted phenotype reminiscent of arp2-arp3 complex mutant trichomes: branches of mutant trichomes are often twisted and variable in length.
weak dwarf phenotype during early vegetative development and a reduced fertility after bolting, although the final plant height appears normal
weaker induction of HSP70A following AZC treatment of  the hsfA2 mutant line when compared with wild-type
Weaker induction of many endoplasmic reticulum stress-responsive genes when compared with the wild-type plants.
Weak ethylene-insensitivity of etr1-2 is suppressed by rte1-2.  Ethylene responses are similar to those of the wild type.
Weak insensitivity to ABA.
Weak phenotype, producing only 5- to 10-fold decrease in sensitivity to ABA inhibition of germination, compared to wild type plants.
Weak semidominant ppd silique phenotype, i.e., similar to deltappd mutant, and leaf curvature phenotype.
Weak stem. Development of schlerenchyma is repressed. Expression of lignin-specific biosynthesis genes is altered and lignin biosynthesis is reduced.
Weak suppression of wol-1 mutant phenotype. Phenotype intermediate between that of wol-1 and wild-type.
When 0.01 &mu;M GA4 was added to the medium, showed a lower germination rate than the wild-type.
When camalexin was determined two days after infection with <i>Pseudomonas syringae</i>, no reduction in camalexin levels relative to wild-type plants was observed.
When double mutant plants were grown at a higher temperature (>30?C), almost all flowers (90%) were severely affected in contrast with wild-type and single mutant plants that showed no floral phenotype. The double mutant flowers exhibited variable floral defects, and all produced a reduced number of organs.
When droplets of the necrotrophic fungi <i>Alternaria brassicicola</i> (10 &#956;L) containing 10<sup>5</sup> spores/mL were  placed on the third, fourth, and fifth true leaves of each plant, wild-type plants developed necrotic spots at the sites of the  inoculation droplets, whereas cyp71A13 mutants developed spreading necrotic lesions.
When exposed to MMS, mutants grew consistently  more vigorously than wild-type. Reduced induction of DNA repair- and cell cycle-related genes.
When expressed per seedling, the 14C-glucose incorporation in the cellulosic fraction was reduced 2.5-fold in prc1-1 compared to the WT, and did not differ significantly from that of the1-1/prc1-1 mutants; this confirmed that cellulose biosynthesis was not restored in the double mutant.
When germinated in the dark, the mutant display a ctr1-like phenotype (short hypocotyls, short roots, and exaggerated apical hooks).
When germinated on MS-agar containing 0.5% sucrose and under medium light (70 &mu;mol of photons m-2 s-1), the homozygous seedlings turned white and stopped growth after cotyledon development. However, when the plants were transferred after 5 days in medium light to dim light (5 &mu;mol of photons m-2 s-1), they could develop, although very slowly and with a stunted appearance; they then formed small yellow leaves.
When germinated on MS medium in a CO2 concentration close to 1% in combination with moderate light intensity. Under these conditions, which very strongly suppress 2-phosphoglycolate synthesis by Rubisco, several very small plants with whitish leaves and a growth arrest at the cotyledon stage segregated. Shadowing by leaves of neighbouring plants resulted in minor chlorophyll biosynthesis, but growth was not significantly improved.
When grown at 22?C, vcs-1 mutants were green, had slightly longer roots, and produced narrow, pointed leaves.
When grown at 22?C, vcs-7 mutants had short roots, small chlorotic cotyledons, and typically failed to produce leaf primordia.
When grown in darkness, mutant seedlings exibited mild photomorphogenic phenotypes, with short hypocotyls and opened cotyledons.
When grown in soil, the double mutant line was not obviously different from wild-type controls. However, when grown hydroponically, the mutants grew considerably more slowly.
When grown in soil or hydroponically, the double mutant line was not obviously different from wild-type controls.
When grown in the absence of sugars plants exhibit growth arrest after germination. Seedling lethal. Shoots exhibit reduced sensitivity to cytokinins but roots appear normal.
When grown in the light, the double mutants display slightly longer hypocotyls, curled unexpanded cotyledons, and short and thicker roots with ectopic root hairs, similar to the ctr1 mutant. Moreover, the average area of the leaf epidermal cells was reduced 5-fold compared to wild type.
When grown in the presence of arsenite, the mutant plants showed arsenite tolerance and reduced arsenic levels.
When grown in the presence of inhibitory levels of cadmium, growth is inhibited, leaves become progressively chlorotic and the roots develop a distinct brown pigment.
When grown in white light in the absence of arsenic, double mutant plants did not show significant differences compared to WT plants in terms of size and general appearance.
When grown long days dra2-1 plants display  small rosettes, short flowering stems and siliques and a general weak aspect. Plants were early flowering under both long- and short- day conditions. Seedlings grown under continuous white light have long hypocotyls and strongly hyponastic cotyledons. The seedling response to W+FR in terms of hypocotyl, cotyledon and primary leaf elongation was attenuated in dra2-1.
When grown on 2,4-D-containing medium, the hyponastic rosette leaves become flat.
When grown on B5 agar, the mutant seedlings were indistinguishable from wildtype, albeit with a slight reduction in root growth. After three weeks of culture, the mutant was morphologically identical from above-ground widltype plants.
When grown on media containing 0.5% sucrose, the mutant had reduced root length but no apparent radial cell expansion.
When grown on media devoid of vitamin B6, the mutant seedlings have a reduced shoot growth and a distinct pale green phenotype, and a marked reduction in primary root growth.
When grown on MS medium with ABA, abo3 mutant was more sensitive to ABA than the wild type during seedling establishment. Mutant seedlings exhibited slower root growth on MS medium as compared to the wild type. Mutant is impaired in ABA induced stomatal closure and more sensitive ti drought stress than the wild type.
When grown on plates containing 250 &#956;M NO3- as the sole source of available N for 10 days, mutant plants grew poorly, shoot growth being particularly affected. Roots and shoots accumulated significantly less NO3- than wild type. Nitrate influx into roots of mutant plants was reduced.
When grown on plates containing 250 &#956;M NO3-  as the sole source of available N for 10 days, mutant plants grew poorly, shoot  growth being particularly affected. Roots and shoots accumulated significantly less NO3- than wild type. Nitrate influx into roots of  mutant plants was reduced.
When grown on soil, the aerial parts of the mutant show reduced growth relative to wildtype, with no apparent change in plant morphology. This difference was not observed when the mutant was grown on MS medium.
When grown on soil, the mutant exhibited reduced growth and smaller leaves.
When grown on soil or Kvitko medium, the homozygous line dies at the cotyledon stage. On medium supplemented with sucrose, the same mutant develops to the flowering stage.
When grown on sterile agar plates supplemented with urea as a sole nitrogen source, wild-type plants developed green leaves when supplied with 1 mM and even as little as 0.5 mM urea, by contrast the mutant line became chlorotic and accumulated more anthocyanins than the wild type.
When grown under constant light, mutant seeds showed a significantly higher rate of survival than WT seeds in the presence of arsenate.
When grown under constant red light, the mutant had longer hypocotyls compared with wild type.
When grown under constant red light, the mutant had shorter hypocotyls compared with wild type plants.
When grown under long day, mutant plants were essentially the same as wild type plants, except having slightly more serrated rosette and cauline leaves.
When grown under long day, mutant plants were essentially the same as wild type plants, except showing some morphological aberrations restricted to the apical part of the gynoecium. Mature styles exhibited slight depression and were generally wider that in the wild type. Style epidermal cells were found at the edges of the stigma, where stigmatic papillae were formed in the WT. Papillae tent to sprawl in all directions. The outer replum is broader in mutant gynoecia. Uppermost portion of the siliques was narrowed, as a result of aborted uppermost ovules in the siliques.
When grown under red light, double mutants had a short hypocotyl length similar to that of the pif3 single mutant, whereas the pil5 pif3 double mutant grown under far-red light had short hypocotyl length similar to that of the pil5 single mutant. Compared with wild-type seedlings, higher percentages of double mutant seedlings grew flat in the dark, i.e., inhibition of hypocotyl negative gravitropism was observed in the dark in the double mutant (similar to pil5 single mutant).
When indole-3-acetonitrile (IAN) was applied to silver nitrate-treated cyp71A13 leaves, camalexin levels were approximately sixfold higher than when water was applied.
When infected with <i>Alternaria brassicicola</i> or <i>Pseudomonas syringae</i>, camalexin levels in infected cyp71A13 mutants were <20% of wild-type levels, even though the ratio of infected to uninfected leaf area was  much larger in the mutants than in the wild type.
When mature plants grown under continuous light were shifted to the dark for 8 h free protochlorophyllide accumulated in the mutant to similar levels in rosette leaves and were 3- to 4-fold higher than in wild-type controls.
When mutant plants are grown at 16C they displayed pleiotrophic developmental defects including dwarfism, small curly leaves and accelerated senescence of the cotyledons. Leaf pavement cells also have abnormal morphology. When grown on plates, chs3-1 plants display an increased freezing tolerance. Plants exhibit chlorosis and spontaneous lesion phenotypes also. These plants also exhibit increased resistance to Psuedomonas syringae.
When partially shaded, mature leaves of phyA-302 show similar rates of leaf yellowing as phyA null-mutants, which show an enhanced rate of leaf yellowing under very low light intensities. Under mild partial shading or darkening, both phyA-302 and phyA null-mutants behave like the wild-type. For more information on the phenotype, see the original report of Yanovski et al 2002, doi: http:/&#8203;/&#8203;dx.&#8203;doi.&#8203;org/&#8203;10.&#8203;1105/&#8203;tpc.&#8203;000521
When partially shaded or darkened, mature leaves of phyA-401 show a reduced rate of leaf yellowing compared to wild-type plants. For more information on the phenotype, see the original report of Dieterle et al 2005, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2004.02286.x
When plants are grown on inclined agar plates root growth is skewed to the left forming clockwise loops with twisted epidermal cell files.
When plants were exposed for four hours to high light intensities of 800-1000 &#956;mol.s-1.m-2 in combination with a 4-to-5 ?C higher temperature, stronger increase in leaf glycine content of the Atgldp1-1 mutant in comparison with both Atgldp2-2 and wild-type plants.
When plants were grown under a long-day regime (16 h day/8 h night), the growth was indistinguishable from wild type.
When plants were wounded by tweezing twice, one week apart,comparison of SALK_090109C to Columbia resulted in significantly less shoot biomass (P=0.049) and significantly more root biomass (P=0.01) in the mutant plants.  There was no significant difference in growth between mutant and wild type upon comparison of growth curves.
When seedlings are grown vertically under dark conditions, the hypocotyl growth orientation of mutant is significantly skewed compared with the wild type.
When seedlings are grown vertically under dark conditions, the mutant has a normal gravitropic response.
When tested by immunofluorescence for RanGAP1 localization, no difference from wild-type plants was detected.
When the FR light is turned off in State I, the induction of State II occurs rapidly and is complete within 3 min. By contrast, in the wild type, this takes at least 10 min.
When the mutant seedlings grown on normal medium were transferred to medium containing 0.03-0.1% (v/v) ethanol, their growth was reduced strongly.
When the mutant was grown on increasing concentrations of ABA, cotyledon greening of ein2-5 seedlings was inhibited dramatically, and the inhibitory effects were increased in a dose-dependent manner. Reduction in percentage of cotyledons turning green of ein2-5 seedlings was more than 10% at as low as 0.1 &mu;M ABA. At 0.5 &mu;M ABA, only about 20% of ein2-5 germinated seedlings turned green while 100% of wild-type seedlings were green at 10 days in light. The root elongation of ein2-5 seedlings was also supersensitive to ABA.
When three-week-old seedlings were treated with the cytosine methylation inhibitor 5-aza-2'-deoxycytine (5Aza-dC), newly grown roots in ros1-1 were found to have a strong luminescence response similar to that in wild-type plants.
When treated with a short pulse of far-red light after seed surface sterilization, double mutant seeds germinated, while majority of wild-type seeds did not.
When treated with a short pulse of far-red light after seed surface sterilization, mutant seeds germinated, while majority of wild-type seeds did not. When wild-type seedlings were grown in the dark, the majority of their hypocotyls were oriented in an upward direction. However, when grown under red or far-red light, the majority of the WT seedlings grew flat on the agar plates. Compared with wild-type seedlings, higher percentages of pil5 mutant seedlings grew flat in the dark, i.e., inhibition of hypocotyl negative gravitropism was observed in the dark in the pil5 mutant.
When treated with a short pulse of far-red light after seed surface sterilization, only half of the double mutant seeds germinated, while majority of wild-type seeds did not.
Whereas, as plants matured, WT rosette leaves curled down, mutant leaves remained flat.
Whereas, in WT seeds, germination could be promoted by a single red or far-red pulse given after 48 h but not after 3 h (matching the time of highest phyA abundance), the germination was no longer promoted in the mutant in either treatment.
Whereas, under normal light conditions, wild-type and mutant hypocotyls are similar in length. However, in the dark, hypocotyl elongation is much reduced in the mutants compared with the wild type. Epidermal hypocotyl cells are bulged and short, indicating that they have lost growth polarity.
Whereas carpels were completely absent in wus-1 flowers and only 1.6 stamens (compared to 6 in wild type) developed in the third floral whorl, all trn2-23010 wus-1 flowers developed 2 carpels, which in contrast to trn2-23010 single mutants were seldom open (33%) and more usually fused. Consistent with the increased number of stamens (4.2 on average) in the third floral whorl, the trn2 mutation may compensate for a premature consumption of stem cells in wus-1 flowers. In contrast, the number of sepals and petals in the outer perianth whorls in trn2-23010 wus-1 was closer in number to that of the trn2 mutant rather than to wus-1 single mutant flowers.
Whereas development of the rpk2-2 anther locules proceeded normally until stage 4, inner secondary parietal cells directly differentiated into tapetum but did not give rise to the middle layer. Microspore mother cells in the rpk2-2 anthers underwent meiosis and formed tetrads between stages 5 and 7. However, subsequent development of microspores was inhibited and deformed microspores that partially aggregated were observed at stage 11.
Whereas roots of wild-type seedlings are elongated at 14?C, no obvious difference in root growth at 14 or 22?C in mutant seedlings are detected, indicating that pip5k9-d is resistant to chilling.
Whereas the germination of wild type seeds was completely inhibited by 30 &#956;M ancymidol (inhibitor of GA biosynthesis), 60% of the mutant seeds still germinated.
Whereas the germination of wild type seeds was completely inhibited by 30 &#956;M ancymidol (inhibitor of GA biosynthesis), some of the mutant seeds still germinated.
Whereas the gynoecium of wild-type flowers consists of two fused carpels ~50% of bop1-4 bop2-11 gynoecia contained only a single, fertile carpel.
Whereas the initial rate of uptake (less than 20 min) was not significantly affected by the mutation, both the uptake at longer times (1 h) and the accumulation after 2 days of both toxic cations correlated inversely with QSO2 function. With K+ and Rb+ uptake, the initial rate of uptake was not affected by QSO2 but, opposite to the results with toxic cations, both the uptake at long times and the accumulation of K+ were directly correlated with QSO2 function.
Whereas the internode length was relatively constant in wild-type plants, whereas close examination of the inflorescence in pny showed that internodes between the siliques often were absent or reduced severely. This internode defect appears to be random, because normal-sized internodes were interspersed along the stem. Clusters of siliques often were visible on the  inflorescences stems, indicating that the internode defect could span a large region of the shoot.
Whereas the surface structure of wildtype pollen grains consisted of elliptical balls with three grooves and a striped exine pattern. By contrast, several rpk2-2 pollens showed deformed ellipses and a partially smooth surface, with most pollen grains highly aggregated together.
Whereas wildtype callus' growth is significantly promoted by 10mM phytosulfokine (PSK), calluses of the mutant are less sensitive to PSK.
Whereas wildtype plants pre-treated with flg22 displayed a decrease in <i>Pseudomonas syringae</i> pv. <i>tomato</i> DC3000 bacterial growth, the baterial grew at the same rate in the mutant whether it was pre-treated or not.
Where in wild-type roots xylem files form a closely packed array of cell  files, leading to the regular occurrence of  tripartite cell corners between xylem cell files, the central cylinder of homozygous mutant roots was disorganized and  the xylem files did not form a closely packed array. As a  consequence, tripartite xylem cell  corners could not be detected in the mutant.
While ABA induces the closing of stomata in wildtype plants, the stomata of the mutant remain open.
While FLC decreased in Lov-1 plants over a 4-wk cold period, flowering time was not accelerated.
white embryo stunted at the globular stage, nevertheless developed into wrinkled seeds. The abnormal seeds were able to germinate but only on sucrose-containing medium. The germinated seedlings grew to dwarf and stunted plants. Total MGDG and DGDG content was dramatically reduced. The fatty acid content and composition of typical thylakoid membrane lipids were largely affected, so were the protein components of the photosynthetic apparatus. Mutant leaves has large intercellular spaces and largely reduced numbers of mesophyll cells. No mature chloroplasts were found in the leaf cells. No proper alignment and stacking of thylakoid membranes.
White-light-grown mutant seedlings are slightly paler than wild-type seedlings. No significant difference in chlorophyll content was observed, but hyh seedlings accumulate slightly reduced levels of anthocyanin.
White seedlings that arrest at the cotyledon stage. Phenotype rescued by providing sucrose. On sucrose, mutant plants have small chloroplasts with fewer thylakoids and shorter granal stacks than WT. Fully developed chloroplasts are not observed.
Whole plant:color:pale yellow.  Chlorophyll biosynthesis:process:defective.  magnesium-protoporphyrin biosynthesis:process:defective.  Screen:Identified in a screen for plants that express LHCB proteins in the absence of functional chloroplasts.
Whole plants were exposed to continuous light  of high PFD (1100 mmol.m-2.s-1) at low temperature (6?C), and no lipid peroxidation could be detected, even after 48 h.
Wider lamina in the third cauline leaf than the respective single mutants.
Wider lamina in the third cauline leaf than the respective single mutants. Increased number of trichomes on sepals than the respective single mutants.
Wild-type and ISE2/ise2 heterozygous embryos remain green as their organs, such as hypocotyls and cotyledons, develop. The corresponding ise2 embryos (from the same silique) were white by light microscopy and never turned green even at later stages.
Wild-type chloroplasts are larger than those of the mutant and have a larger number of discs per grana stack on average. In addition, the wild-type chloroplasts display well-developed membrane systems composed of grana connected by the stroma lamellae, but the thylakoid membrane systems in mutant chloroplasts are disturbed, and the membrane spacing is not as clear.
Wild-type hypocotyl length under red, blue and white light, as well as in the dark.
Wild-type-like hypocotyl growth inhibition response to hourly FR pulses.
Wild type morphology; double mutant that retains preexixting CpG methylation at the endogenous FWA locus but lacks de novo CpG methylation normaly associated with FWA transgene silencing; blocks de novo CpNpG and asymmetric methylation and gene silencing of the endogenous Superman (SUP) gene, which is normally triggered by an inverted SUP repeat, doesn't show reactivation of previously established SUP epigenetic silenced alleles
Wild type morphology; exhibits decreased CpXpG methylation of the Superman (SUP) gene and of other sequences throughout the genome; also show reactivated expression of endogenous retrotransposon sequences; encodes a cytosine methyltransferase homolog.
Wild type morphology; lacks the cytosine methylation at sites of CpNpG trinucleotides (where N is A, C, G or T); low level of expression of two retrotransposon-related sequences (Athila and Ta3 sequences); suppresses the clark kent allele clk-3; lacks trichomes on stems and leaves.
Wild-type phenotype. Both single mutant phenotypes are fully suppressed.
Wild-type phenotype restored.
Wild-type plants were minimally sensitive to 5 &#956;M 5-methyltryptophan (5MT), whereas the double mutant was extremely sensitive to this concentration of 5MT and appears at least threefold more sensitive to 5MT than to wild type.
Wildtype roots.
Wild type rosette. bri loss of function phenotype is suppressed.
Wild-type seeds germinate when PHYB is activated by red light but not when PHYB is inactivated by far-red light.  som mutant seeds germinate at rates of almost 100% irrespective of light conditions.
Wilting of the inflorescence.
Wilty phenotype, consistent with impaired stomatal regulation. Stomatal  closure was suppressed in response to darkness, calcium and exogenous ABA. Stomata  are defective in drought-induced  closure.
Wilty phenotype against rapid humudity decrease.
With a few exceptions, no increase in zeatin concentrations.
With respect to cotyledon unfolding and greening, the double mutant was  indistinguishable from the wild type.
With the exception of ADH, all other enzymatic activities increase with the onset of maturation.
With the exception of the collapsed xylem phenotype, both the organization of the vascular tissue and the organization of the entire stem of the three irx mutants are identical to that of the wild type. In addition to stems, the collapsed xylem phenotype of irx plants has been observed in mature hypocotyls and in the primary root and petioles.
With the reduction of the nitrate concentration to 1 mM, the occurrence of the senescence phenotype in the rosette leaves of mutant plants was accelerated to 20 DAG, and severe senescence in the developing mutant siliques resulted in their death around 30 DAG without producing viable seeds. Under the same growth condition (1 mM nitrate), wild-type plants did not start senescence in their rosette leaves until 26 DAG, and produced fecund siliques.
wrinkled mature seed with a 60% reduction in seed oil and a 15% reduction in protein. Developing embryo contained less chlorophyll, smaller oil body, larger starch granule, and reduced thylakoid membranes.
wrinkled seed; dry seed mass reduced by 35%, a 50-70% reduction of fatty acid content, significantly modified fatty acid composition; embryo elongation and curvature were drastically retarded, smaller maturing embryo, small twisted cotyledons with irregular boundaries
WT
WT-like vegetative growth. Absent or short internodes between siliques. Occasionally, two or more secondary inflorescences developed at the cauline leaf axils.
WT morphological phenotype. Decreased DNA methylation of target genes.
WT phenotype
WT phenotype. Also, no effect on light-induced stomatal opening.
WT phenotype.  Root bending and root elongation assays under salt, osmotic and ABA treatments showed no significant difference compared to WT.
WT phenotype. RT-PCR confirmed that RPL23aA and RPL23aB transcript levels are similar between WT and homozygotes.
WT phenotype. The single var2 variegated phenotype is suppresed.
WT phenotype exhibited by both heterozygous and homozygous plants.
WT phenotype exhibited by  both heterozygous and homozygous plants.
WT phenotype in terms of visible characteristics.  Approx 25% reduction in cell wall xylose content as compared to WT. Xylose is primarily lost from pectin polymers. Decreased cell wall branched GalA residues, 3,4-GalA.
WT phenotype is grown on soil. Develops less biomass than loh2 on growth media supplemented with sucrose. Suppresses loh2 mutant AAL-toxin sensitivity phenotype.
WT phenotype morphologically and with respect to nonphotochemical quenching.
WT phenotype under normal growth conditions
WT phenotype under normal growth conditions. Under conditions of magnesium stress (under 50 mM Mg2+), germination is poor and plantlet development is severely retarded.
WT phenotype under short day conditions. Slow-growing under long day conditions. Slower light-induced stomatal opening.
WT phenotype with respect to resistance to L.Maculans infection
WT root phenotype.  34% of terminal flowers have extra carpels in the fourth whorl.
Xylem cells are significantly smaller in the homozygous mutant compared with  the wild type. The cell walls surrounding the xylem vessels are also  severely reduced in thickness in the mutants.
Yellow/pale-green phenotype and reduced growth. Reduced accumulation of ClpPRS complex.  Reduced chloroplast size and thylakoid accumulation. Delayed plant development.
Yellow-green and significantly smaller than WT.
Yellow-green leaves and stems from the juvenile stage until the beginning of flowering. At these stages of development, the levels of chlorophylls and carotenoids in the mutant are approximately half of that of wildtype.
yellow-green pigment mutant: scored yellow-green / albino on both agar and soil
Yellow-green plants, defective in chloroplast biogenesis
Yellowish leaves due to an ~25% reduction of chlorophyll content.
yellow or pale seed color
Young emerging leaves  and the basal part of expanding leaves exhibited a palegreen  phenotype. As leaves matured, the leaf color shifted  to green, with no obvious difference compared to the  wild-type leaves.  The shape and size  of chloroplasts in expanding leaves were similar to those  in the wild type. However, in the basal part of expanding leaf of the  antisense line, chloroplasts were pale and smaller than  those of the wild type. Interestingly,  nucleoids were concentrated in a few large structures  in both the tip and basal part of the expanding  leaves of the antisense line.
zip17 mutants exhibit a greater inhibition of primary root elongation in response to NaCl than wild type seedlings. The salt-sensitive phenotype co-segregates with the zip17 T-DNA and can be rescued by a 35S:AtbZIP17 construct. Several salt-responsive genes, such as ATHB-7, that showed a reduced transcriptional response to salt in s1p-3 mutants, also show a reduced transcriptional response to a salt treatment in zip17 mutants
Zip1 dominantly supresses the zigzag phenotype of the zig1 mutant. The zip1 gain of function allele results in ectopic expression of VTI12 which forms complexes with SYP22. Corrects the gravtitropism defect of zag1 homozygotes.