Results. . Expression of different CRT family members in Arabidopsis. Arabidopsis seedlings lacking AtCRT1a exhibit lessened seedling growth in response to tunicamycin treatment [11]. One reason for this could be that other CRT family members are functionally redundant with AtCRT1a, i.e. in the absence of AtCRT1a the other CRTs may be sufficient to maintain CRT activity. In agreement with this, the two closely related CRT homologs AtCRT1a and CRT1b are co-expressed over approximately 2,000 publicly available microarray datasets (Figure S1A). Detailed semi-quantitative RT-PCR further revealed that AtCRT1a is expressed at moderate, or high levels in all major tissues investigated (Figure S1B). This is similar to what has previously been shown for AtCRT1b [11]. The third CRT family member, AtCRT3, is also expressed in most of the investigated tissues, with an enhanced expression in senescing leaves (Figure S1B) To examine the expression in more detail we generated AtCRT1a, CRT1b and CRT3 promoter fusion constructs with the reporter gene beta-glucuronidase (GUS), and introduced these into Arabidopsis plants. Three independent lines tested of both the AtCRT1a and CRT1b promoter constructs displayed almost identical expression patterns throughout different tissue- and cell types (Figure 1), consistent with the transcriptional coordination described above (Figure S1A). For example, these lines exhibited high GUS activity in the root tip, and expanding root cells, and were also active in rosette leaves, floral tissues including pollen, and in expanding cotyledons (Figure 1). The AtCRT3 expression was similarly confined to expanding cells, and rosette leaves, but was absent from the root tip, and from mature pollen (Figures 1C and F). Interestingly, two-day-old seedlings were stained heavily for AtCRT1a and CRT1b promoter activity, but GUS activity in the AtCRT3 reporter lines was virtually absent from such seedlings (Compare Figures 1G to I). In addition, whereas AtCRT3 showed GUS activity in senescing leaves, that of AtCRT1a and CRT1b (not shown) was much reduced (compare Figures 1P and Q).. . 10.1371/journal.pone.0011342.g001. Figure 1. . Expression of AtCRT1a, CRT1b and CRT3.. Expression patterns of the AtCRT1a, CRT1b, and CRT3 genes assessed through promoter:GUS constructs. The GUS expression is indicated by blue colour. A to C. Six-day-old seedlings expressing GUS-constructs for AtCRT1a (A), CRT1b (B), and CRT3 (C). Root tip images for the different lines are represented as inserts. Arrows indicate expression in the root tips. D to F. Floral tissues from five week-old plants expressing GUS-constructs for AtCRT1a (D), CRT1b (E), and CRT3 (F). Arrows indicate GUS activity in the pollen. G to I. Two-day-old seedlings expressing GUS-constructs for AtCRT1a (G), CRT1b (H), and CRT3 (I). Arrows indicate GUS activity in the roots. J to L. Etiolated six-day-old seedlings expressing GUS-constructs for AtCRT1a (J), CRT1b (K), and CRT3 (L). Inserts indicate GUS expression in the cotyledons. M to O. Rosette leaves from four-week-old plants expressing GUS-constructs for AtCRT1a (M), CRT1b (N), and CRT3 (O). P and Q. Senescing leaves (from eight-week-old plants) expressing GUS-constructs for AtCRT1a (P), and CRT3 (Q).. . . . . . Activation of CRT expression. To determine whether the different CRT promoters may be activated by external cues we grew three independent AtCRT1a, CRT1b, and CRT3 GUS lines on plates for three days in light. We then transferred the seedlings to microscope slides that were coated with MS medium, and grew them for two additional days. The slides were subsequently transferred to containers for exposure to different inductive treatments. We incubated the seedlings for three, 12 and 24 h in 150 mM glucose, 150 mM sucrose, 150 mM mannitol, 10 g/ml tunicamycin, 10 mM DTT, or 250 M salicylic acid. We chose these treatments based on publicly available microarray datasets, and on the chaperone related functions of CRTs [12]. Both the AtCRT1a and CRT1b promoters showed strong signals at 12, and 24 h after tunicamycin treatment (Figure 2A). In contrast, the activity of the AtCRT3 promoter was not noticeably increased in response to the same treatment (Figure 2A). These data are in agreement with previous data obtained from northern blotting [24], or from microarray analyses [30]. We did not observe any major changes in the activation or repression of the CRT promoters in response to any of the other stresses (data not shown). The strong activation of the AtCRT1a and CRT1b promoters in response to tunicamycin is indicative of an association to tunicamycin-induced ER stress, or the UPR [11]; [13]. In animal cells, tunicamycin-mediated inhibition of N-linked glycosylation in the ER leads to the up-regulation of a battery of ER chaperones, including calnexins (CNXs), BiPs, and protein disulfide isomerases (PDIs; [31]). In agreement with this, AtCRT1a and CRT1b are closely co-expressed with other typical ER chaperone genes, including CNXs, PDIs and BiPs (Figure 2B; [32]), indicating that these CRTs may act as part of an ER chaperone network in Arabidopsis.. . 10.1371/journal.pone.0011342.g002. Figure 2. . Stress induction of AtCRT1a, CRT1b, and CRT3.. A. Tunicamycin induction (10 g/ml tunicamycin) of AtCRT1a, CRT1b, and CRT3 expression assessed by promoter:GUS constructs in five-day-old control seedlings and in seedlings treated with tunicamycin for 12 and 24 h, respectively. The GUS expression is indicated by blue colour, and by arrows. B. Co-expression network for AtCRT1a and CRT1b using the AraGenNet at http://aranet.mpimp-golm.mpg.de/aranet/ [44]. Brief annotations of genes are indicated in black boxes. Different colored edges indicate strength of transcriptional coordination. Green; mutual rank 10, Orange; mutual rank 20, Red; mutual rank 30. Low mutual rank indicates stronger co-expression relationships.. . . . . . Tissue- and cell specific distribution of CRTs in Arabidopsis. To assess the distribution of the CRT proteins at the tissue- and cellular level we generated specific antibodies for the different family members. We used as antigens peptides derived from their C-terminal regions, which are flexible in structure and variable in sequence between family members. We verified the specificity of the antibodies in western blot analyses (Figures 3A). An antibody raised against a full-length maize CRT recognizes three distinct bands in typical microsomal fractions from either cell suspensions (not shown), or Arabidopsis leaves (Figure 3A; [8]). The size differences might reflect differential N-glycosylation states between the different CRTs, i.e. the AtCRT1a is predicted to have three potential N-linked glycosylation sites whereas AtCRT1b and CRT3 only contains one predicted N-linked glycosylation site each (Figure 3B; [11]). Consistent with this, the AtCRT1a antibody recognized a band that is of similar apparent molecular weight to the upper CRT band recognized by the maize antibody, and which has previously been shown to be absent in Atcrt1a mutant plants [11]. The AtCRT1b and CRT3 antibodies did, on the other hand, recognize bands with lower apparent molecular weights (Figure 3A). The different bands recognized by the peptide antibodies all correspond well with CRT bands recognized by the maize CRT antibody (Figure 3A).. . 10.1371/journal.pone.0011342.g003. Figure 3. . Immuno-fluorescence of AtCRT1a, and CRT1b in Arabidopsis roots.. A. Western blot of microsomal membrane fractions from Arabidopsis cell suspensions using antibodies against a full-length maize CRT [33], and against AtCRT1a, CRT1b, and CRT3 peptides, respectively. A putative band for CNX recognized by the full-length maize CRT antibody is indicated by arrow. Twenty g total protein was loaded per lane. B. Schematic model depicting potential N-linked glycosylation sites in respective Arabidopsis CRT. C to F. Root sections from 14-day-old Arabidopsis seedlings corresponding to the early elongation zone, probed with AtCRT1a, and CRT1b antibodies. C and D. Root sections probed with specific peptide antibodies for AtCRT1a (C), and AtCRT1b (D), and with pre-immune sera used as control (E and F). Scale bars=70 m. White arrows indicate root cap. G to J, Root sections from 14-day-old Arabidopsis seedlings corresponding to the upper elongation zone, probed with AtCRT1b antibodies (G and H), and with pre-immune sera used as control (I and J). atr; atrichoblasts, tr; trichoblasts, px; protoxylem, pp; protophloem, rc; root cap. Scale bars=25 m. K and L. AtCRT1a, and CRT1b expression in roots in six-day-old seedlings as assessed by GUS activity (blue colour).. . . . After affinity purification we used the different CRT peptide antibodies to probe sections of Arabidopsis roots to reveal the distribution of the individual CRTs in different cell types. All the CRT family members appeared to be abundantly expressed in roots (Figure 1). The AtCRT1a antibody revealed an even distribution of this protein in most cells throughout the early elongation zone in young roots, and a high level accumulation in the root cap (Figure 3C). In equivalent sections incubated with the AtCRT1b antibody, fluorescence predominantly appeared in the outermost root cap (Figure 3D). In addition, AtCRT1b, but not CRT1a, labeling was evident in epidermal cells, both in trichoblasts and atrichoblasts, and in developing xylem cells, in sections corresponding to the late elongation zone (Figures 3G and H). These results are in agreement with GUS activity in promoter::reporter lines for the two genes, which showed strong GUS activity in the early elongation cells for AtCRT1a, and a slightly later onset for AtCRT1b, which was also active in the vascular tissues (Figures 3K and L). Furthermore, several of the trichoblasts and atrichoblasts showed immuno-fluorescence signals that appeared dotted (data not shown), possibly indicating ER-localization. We did not observe any immuno-fluorescence signal when probing with AtCRT3 antibodies, indicating that the protein accumulates at low levels, or that the epitope is masked in situ. No signals were obtained when probed with the respective pre-immune sera (Figures 3E, F, I and J), nor in Atcrt1a and crt1b mutants probed with AtCRT1a and CRT1b antibodies, respectively (data not shown).. . . Subcellular localization of AtCRT1a, CRT1b, and CRT3. The immuno-fluorescence data suggest that the two CRTs, AtCRT1a and CRT1b, accumulate in partially overlapping but distinct cell types. To determine whether there are also differences in the subcellular distribution we utilized immuno-cytochemical techniques together with transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The AtCRT1b antibody recognized epitopes that appeared associated with the ER, e.g. ribosome enriched segments, in Arabidopsis root sections from the early elongation zone (Figure 4A). No labeling was observed in an Atcrt1b mutant under the same conditions (data not shown). In addition, we also found AtCRT1b epitopes in structures resembling plasmodesmata (Figure 4B). To confirm the plasmodesmata localization we co-incubated the sections with the AtCRT1b antibody raised in rabbits, and a callose (beta-1, 3-glucan) antibody raised in mice. Consistent with localization of AtCRT1b to the plasmodesmata the callose antibody labeled regions in close vicinity to the AtCRT1b labeling (Figure 4B). Similarly, we observed AtCRT1a associated with the plasmodesmata (Figure 4C), and also with intracellular compartments reminiscent of the ER (data not shown). However, labeling by the AtCRT1a antibodies appeared less dense than by the AtCRT1b antibody, possibly because the binding epitope was obscured, or perhaps due to lower levels of AtCRT1a in the analyzed cells.. . 10.1371/journal.pone.0011342.g004. Figure 4. . Subcellular localization of AtCRT1a, CRT1b, and CRT3.. Root sections of Arabidopsis incubated with AtCRT1b (A and B), and CRT1a (C) peptide antibodies. A. AtCRT1b antibody labeling is indicated by white arrowheads. Scale bar=0.2 m. Insert show enlarged area of immunogold labeled area. Scale bar=50 nm. B. The AtCRT1b and callose antibody labeling are indicated by white, and black arrowheads, respectively. Scale bar=50 nm. C. AtCRT1a and callose antibody labeling is indicated by white, and black arrowheads, respectively. Scale bar=100 nm. PD; Plasmodesmata, CW; Cell wall. Insert show enlarged area of immunogold labeled area; white arrow heads CRT1a, and black arrow heads Callose. Scale bar=20 nm D. Transient expression of AtCRT3 tagged with a CFP in tobacco leaves. Fluorescence is indicated in light-blue, and chloroplasts in red. Scale bar=500 nm. Arrow indicates nuclear envelope.. . . . Many attempts were made to visualize the AtCRT3 by immuno-gold labeling but, analogous to the immuno-labeling attempts, we were unable to obtain any signals above the pre-immune serum control. Since contrasting localization data has been presented for AtCRT3, i.e. ER (27) and cytoplasm or nucleus (25), we argued that it would be important to consolidate the subcellular location of the protein. We therefore generated an AtCRT3 fusion with the fluorescent marker CFP (cyano fluorescent protein) under the control of a 35S promoter. We inserted the CFP seven amino acids upstream of the C terminus to minimize a possible influence on the activity of its putative ER-retention signal (HDEL). We subsequently transiently transformed the construct into tobacco leaves, and visualized the CFP signal under a confocal microscope (Figure 4D). The CFP signal displayed a reticular network, reminiscent of the ER. In addition, the signal also clearly outlined the nucleus, possibly representing the nuclear envelope (Figure 4D). These data are consistent with the predicted sub-cellular localization of CRTs, i.e. in the ER [12], and with the fact that AtCRT3 holds an ER retention signal in its far C terminus.. . . AtCRT3 expression in crt-/- mouse fibroblasts. We have previously shown that AtCRT1a restores CRT deficiencies in mouse fibroblasts [11]. To test whether also AtCRT3 can complement the CRT-deficient mouse cells we expressed the AtCRT3 fused to a HA-tag in these cells. Five stable transgenic cell lines were established, and expression was confirmed using immuno-blotting with a HA-tag antibody (Figure 5A). A single band at 60 kDa was detected in all AtCRT3 lines, while no bands were present in the CRT-deficient control lines. To confirm that the recombinant AtCRT3 was located to the ER, immuno-labeling using the HA-tag antibody was performed (Figure 5B, red color). All AtCRT3 transgenic cell lines showed ER-localization, which was confirmed by co-localization with an antibody against the ER marker PDI (Figures. 5C and E). These data support the ER localization of the CFP-tagged CRT3 in tobacco leaves (Figure 4D).. . 10.1371/journal.pone.0011342.g005. Figure 5. . AtCRT3 complementation of crt-/- mouse fibroblasts.. A. Immunoblot analysis of AtCRT3 expressed in crt-/- mouse fibroblasts. The PVDF membranes were probed with anti-HA-tag antibodies. Twenty g total protein was loaded per lane. B to E. Immuno-labeling of AtCRT3 expressed in CRT-deficient mouse cells (line AtCRT3-25) with anti-HA-tag (AtCRT3; B), anti-PDI (ER-marker; C), and DAPI (nuclear-marker; D). E. Overlay, the yellow color indicates identical localization of ER-marker, and AtCRT3. Scale bar=25 m. F. Comparison of amino acid sequences of AtCRT1a, CRT1b and CRT3 and human CRT1 and CRT2 (GenBank accession no. AAC49695, AAK74014, AAC49697, AAA51916, NP_659483, respectively). The black rectangles represent the amino acids residues important for CRT function. G. ER Ca2+ content measurements in different mouse fibroblast lines. Total cellular Ca2+ content was determined by incubation with 55 Ci 45Ca2+ followed by addition of thapsigargin. H. Measurements of bradykinin (BK)-induced Ca2+ release in different mouse fibroblast lines. Mouse fibroblasts were loaded with the fluorescent Ca2+ indicator Fura-2 followed by stimulation with BK. Typical traces showing cytosolic Ca2+ levels before and after addition of BK, and thapsigargin (TG). The experiments were carried out using a Ca2+-free medium. I. deltaCa2+ after addition of BK from (H). Wild-type; Mouse fibroblast containing CRT, CRT def control; CRT-deficient cell line, AtCRT3 and AtCRT3m; CRT-deficient cell lines complemented with AtCRT3 constructs. Results represent the average  SE of three independent experiments.. . . . Most animal CRTs do not hold N-linked glycans (Frickel and Ellgaard, 2003). To test whether plant CRTs, i.e. the AtCRT3 and CRT1a [11], undergo N-linked glycosylation when expressed in the mouse cells we treated lysates derived from mouse cells, expressing either AtCRT1a or CRT3, with the glycosidase PNGase F that removes N-linked glycans (Figure S2A). The glycosidase treatment of cell lysates decreased the apparent molecular weights of the plant CRTs on immunoblots (Figure S2A), suggesting that the AtCRT1a and CRT3 may acquire N-linked glycans when expressed in the mouse cells.. . . Ca2+-storage, and agonist-induced capacities are restored by expressing AtCRT3 in crt-/- mouse fibroblasts. AtCRT3 contains a smaller number of negatively charged amino acids in its C terminus compared to AtCRT1a and CRT1b, and most animal CRTs, indicating a lower Ca2+-holding ability of the protein [33]. Notably, most amino acids that are important for chaperone functions in animal CRTs are conserved in AtCRT1a and CRT1b, but not in AtCRT3 (Figure 5F; [34]). For example, the amino acids corresponding to Asp258 and Glu260 in animal CRT (numbers referred to human CRT1) that are necessary for chaperone activities and ERp57 interactions [34] have been changed to Asn268 and Leu270 in AtCRT3 (Figure 5F). Similar changes are also seen in CRT3 orthologs in maize and rice (data not shown). To assess whether these changes may distinguish AtCRT3 functions from that of typical CRTs, we measured the ER Ca2+-holding potential and the responsiveness to BK of the AtCRT3 complemented crt-/- mouse fibroblasts. These fibroblasts were cultured in the presence of 45Ca2+ for 50 h, as described in [11]. Addition of the ER Ca2+-ATPase blocker thapsigargin caused a significant increase (approximately 1.5-fold) in Ca2+-release in AtCRT3 expressing cells compared with the CRT-deficient control cells (Figure 5G).. We further measured the BK-induced Ca2+-release in the AtCRT3-transfected fibroblasts, via the fluorescent Ca2+ indicator Fura2 [3]. The basal Ca2+ level in the cytosol before addition of BK was estimated to be 100 nM for all cell lines (Figure 5H). Addition of BK to the cells resulted in a rapid release of Ca2+ in all lines tested (Figure 5H). However, the release from the mouse control, and AtCRT3 expressing cells were approximately 1.5- to 2-fold higher as compared to that from the CRT-deficient control cells (Figure 5H). In addition, the amounts of Ca2+ release in the mouse wild-type, and AtCRT3 expressing lines were similar, indicating that AtCRT3 restored the CRT deficiencies in the crt-/- fibroblasts (Figure 5I). These data are similar to data obtained from AtCRT1a expressing crt-/- fibroblasts [11], and show that AtCRT3 holds basic CRT functions.. . . Mutations in AtCRT3 do not enhance CRT activities in crt-/- mouse fibroblasts. In spite of the alteration of the amino acids Asp258 and Glu260 conserved in animal CRTs to Asn268 and Leu270 in AtCRT3, AtCRT3 restored the ER Ca2+-holding, and BK-induced release of Ca2+ in the CRT-deficient mouse cells. To assure that this is the case we introduced these amino acids, essential for ERp57 interaction (Asp and Glu), to the positions of Asn268 and Leu270 in AtCRT3, respectively, and then generated five transgenic mouse cells expressing this AtCRT3 variant, referred to as AtCRT3m. We verified that the expression and localization of AtCRT3m was similar to that of AtCRT3 (Figures S2B to F). The thapsigargin-sensitive ER Ca2+ content in the crt-/- mouse fibroblasts expressing AtCRT3m was very similar to the thapsigargin sensitive ER Ca2+ storage capacity of the AtCRT3 expressing cells (Figure 5G). Similarly, no significant differences between the AtCRT3 and CRT3m were detected when we assessed the BK-induced Ca2+ releases (Figures 5H, I, and S3). These data suggest that the introduction of the Asp258 and Glu260 conserved in most CRTs, at corresponding sites to Asn268 and Leu270 in AtCRT3 do not affect localization of the protein, the ability to retain Ca2+ in the ER, nor the capability to sustain BK-induced Ca2+-release from the ER in the mouse fibroblast system.. . . Expression of AtCRT1a and CRT3 in CRT-deficient mouse cells do not restore cell adhesion deficiencies. In addition to compromised ER Ca2+ levels and BK-induced Ca2+ releases, the crt-/- fibroblasts also exhibit a lower degree of cell-substratum adhesion [4]. To test whether expression of AtCRT1a or CRT3 in the crt-/- mouse fibroblasts have regained their adhesive potency we determined the cell shape, which is conventionally examined to assess cell spreading, and therefore the level of cell adhesion [4]. Figures 6A and B clearly show that wild-type cells, which contain CRT, readily adhered to the surface. In contrast, the CRT-deficient cells did not (Figures 6A and C). Interestingly, the AtCRT1a and CRT3 expressing cell lines that restored the ER Ca2+ content, and the BK-induced Ca2+ release from the ER only partially restored the cell adhesiveness (Figures 6A, D and E). Approximately, 50% of the AtCRT1a and CRT3 expressing cells showed cell spreading, whereas wild-type cells typically had above 75% cell spreading (Figure 6A). Thus the level of cell adhesion is not fully restored by the plant CRTs. This suggests that restoration of the ER Ca2+ content alone is not sufficient to fully restore cell adhesion activity.. . 10.1371/journal.pone.0011342.g006. Figure 6. . Cell adhesion in AtCRT1a and CRT3 expressing crt-/- mouse fibroblasts.. A. Relative value of normal, and focal contact, phenotype with regards to the total number of the cells of a 25 mm cell culture dish. B to E. Phase contrast images of various cell lines after 16 h growth. Inserts display magnified part of image. Wild-type; Mouse fibroblast containing CRT, CRT def control; CRT-deficient cell line, AtCRT1a and AtCRT3; CRT-deficient cell lines complemented with AtCRT1a and AtCRT3 constructs, respectively. Results represent the average  SE of three independent experiments.. . . . . . Mutations in AtCRT1b result in altered tunicamycin responsiveness, and in retarded seedling growth. We previously described wild-type like growth in Atcrt1a mutant plants under normal growth conditions [11]. However, Atcrt1a mutants exhibited an increased sensitivity to the UPR-inducing agent tunicamycin. This relatively weak phenotype, i.e. lessened seedling growth, in response to tunicamycin may be due to functional compensation by AtCRT1b that is present in the mutant. To test this, we isolated two independent Atcrt1b mutant lines that appear to be null mutants for the encoded protein as assessed by western blotting (Figures 7A and B). The western analysis also revealed that the AtCRT1b band migrated to an apparent lower molecular weight (Figure 7B), consistent with the notion that AtCRT1b may hold lower levels of glycans compared to AtCRT1a.. . 10.1371/journal.pone.0011342.g007. Figure 7. . Atcrt1b single, and Atcrt1a crt1b double mutant characterization.. A. Schematic representation of approximate localization of the T-DNA lines for Atcrt1b. B. Western blot of microsomal proteins of Atcrt1b-1 single, and Atcrt1a crt1b double mutants using maize CRT antibodies (110 000; upper panel), and AtCRT1b antibodies (12000; lower panel). Twenty g total protein was loaded per lane. C to E. Images (D and E), and fresh weight measurements (C) of 14-day-old seedlings grown on control MS media (D), and MS media supplemented with 0.1 g/ml tunicamycin (E), respectively. C. Values are indicated as percent compared to wild-type on control media (left), and to wild-type on tunicamycin supplied media (right). From left, wt, Atcrt1b single, and Atcrt1a crt1b double mutants. Scale bars=5 mm. SE=standard error (n=20). F and G. Image (F), and hypocotyl length measurements (G) of 6-day-old etiolated seedlings grown on MS media. From left, wt, and Atcrt1a crt1b double mutants. SE=standard error (n=20).. . . . Under normal growth conditions mature Atcrt1b mutant plants did not display any significant phenotypes compared to wild-type control plants. However, both light-grown and etiolated seedlings were significantly smaller compared to wild-type seedlings (Figures 7C to G). Interestingly, Atcrt1b seedlings exhibited a relatively lower sensitivity to tunicamycin compared to wild-type control seedlings (Figures 7C and E). These data may suggest that loss of AtCRT1b constitutively triggers a stress similar to UPR in the seedlings, or that the perception of this type of stress is altered in the mutant seedlings.. . . Atcrt1a crt1b double mutants are impaired in hypocotyl expansion. To assess whether the relatively mild phenotypes for Atcrt1a and crt1b are due to functional redundancy between the two homologs we generated Atcrt1a crt1b double mutants. The absence of both proteins was confirmed in western blot analyses (Figure 7B). Although we did not observe any obvious phenotypes in mature plants, the double mutant seedlings were significantly smaller compared to the wild-type line (Figures 7C and D), and to the Atcrt1a mutant parent line (Figure 7C). However, there was no major size difference between the Atcrt1b mutant and the Atcrt1a crt1b double mutant seedlings grown in light (Figure 7C). These data suggest a predominant role of AtCRT1b over AtCRT1a in light-grown seedlings. However, when grown in the dark the Atcrt1a crt1b double mutant did exhibit an additive phenotype compared to the Atcrt1a and crt1b single mutant parent lines (Figures 7F and G), suggesting that both AtCRT1a and CRT1b contribute to etiolated seedling growth. The Atcrt1a crt1b seedlings displayed lower sensitivity to tunicamycin-dependent growth retardation as compared to wild-type seedlings (Figures 7C to E) indicating that they either are under constitutive ER stress, or that the perception of such stress is different in the mutants. Consistent with this hypothesis both the Atcrt1b and the Atcrt1a crt1b mutants were two- to four-fold less sensitive to tunicamycin compared to wild-type control seedlings (data not shown), corroborating that the mutants may be primed for ER stress prior to the tunicamycin treatment.. One explanation for the lower tunicamycin sensitivity in the mutant seedlings could be that they constitutively produce higher levels of different ER chaperones in the absence of AtCRT1b. However, in the case of the Atcrt1b single mutants, it is likely that an increased production of, for example, the tunicamycin-sensitive AtCRT1a would mask any growth phenotype. Indeed, this scenario is corroborated by the fact that AtCRT1a complemented the Atcrt1b growth phenotypes when over-expressed (Figure 8; see below). To assess whether the expression of ER chaperones is constitutively active in the mutants we performed real-time PCR analysis on a range of such genes, which have been shown to be induced by tunicamycin [30]. Figure S4 shows no significant differences in the basal expression levels of these chaperone-related genes in the mutants as compared to wild-type control seedlings. Although it cannot be ruled out that these putative chaperones are altered at the protein level, it is plausible that the perception of, or response to, tunicamycin is altered in Atcrt1b and Atcrt1a crt1b.. . 10.1371/journal.pone.0011342.g008. Figure 8. . Complementation of the Atcrt1b single, and Atcrt1a crt1b double mutants with AtCRT1a, or CRT3.. A. Expression of AtCRT1a, and AtCRT1b in the different mutant combinations assessed by semi-quantitative RT-PCR. ACTIN was used as control. B. Western blot using the peptide antibodies against AtCRT3 to assess production of AtCRT3 in the 35S:AtCRT3 transformed mutant lines. Twenty g total protein was loaded per lane. C to F. Assessment of complementation of Atcrt1b single and Atcrt1a crt1b double mutants by AtCRT1a or CRT3 under the control of a 35S promoter, respectively. C. Graph of fresh-weight for 14-day-old wt, Atcrt1b single, and Atcrt1a crt1b double mutant seedlings, and of mutant seedlings over-expressing AtCRT1a or CRT3, respectively, grown on MS medium. The graph depicts one out of three experimental repeats. D. Images of typical 14-day-old wt, Atcrt1b single, and Atcrt1a crt1b double mutant seedlings, and of mutant seedlings over-expressing AtCRT3 grown on MS medium. Scale bars=5 mm. E. Expression of AtCRT1a in Atcrt1b, or in Atcrt1b transformed with AtCRT1a under a 35S promoter. ACTIN was used as control. F. Western blot using the maize CRT antibody to assess production of AtCRT1a in the 35S:AtCRT1a transformed Atcrt1a crt1b double mutant lines. Twenty g total protein was loaded per lane. G. Images of typical wt, and of Atcrt1b mutants that were complemented with AtCRT1a under the control of a 35S promoter. Scale bars=5 mm.. . . . . . AtCRT1a, but not AtCRT3, expression restores growth in Atcrt1b and Atcrt1a crt1b mutants. To test whether the different Arabidopsis CRTs could restore the growth defects in the Atcrt1b single, and Atcrt1a crt1b double mutants we introduced two constructs with either an AtCRT1a cDNA or an AtCRT3 cDNA driven by a constitutive 35S promoter into the two mutant lines. To confirm the expression of AtCRT1a and CRT3 we performed semi-quantitative RT-PCR, and western blotting, respectively (Figures 8A, B, E, F and S3B). Several independent AtCRT1a-transformed Atcrt1b mutant lines displayed an increase in AtCRT1a mRNA production and AtCRT1a protein accumulation (Figures 8E and F). Similarly, mutant lines transformed with AtCRT3 displayed increased levels of AtCRT3 protein (Figures 8B and S3B). These data show that the transformed mutant lines produce higher levels of AtCRT1a and CRT3 compared to the untransformed mutant lines, respectively. AtCRT1a restored the growth to wild-type levels of the Atcrt1b mutant (Figures 8C and G), indicating that the AtCRT1a and CRT1b proteins are functionally redundant at least during seedling growth. In contrast, AtCRT3 did not complement the Atcrt1b, nor the Atcrt1a crt1b double mutant phenotypes (Figures 8C and D). These differences were significant (t-tests t9=5.74, P=1.310-5 for Atcrt1b compared to Atcrt1b AtCRT3), suggesting a divergent role of AtCRT3 from AtCRT1a and CRT1b.. . . Atcrt3, but not Atcrt1a nor crt1b, mutants are impaired in elf18 perception, and signaling in Arabidopsis. To assess whether mutations in the AtCRT3 gene affect any aspects of plant growth we screened T-DNA lines for homozygous inserts in the gene (SALK_051336). AtCRT3 protein was undetectable in homozygous mutant plants, confirming that the T-DNA insertion disrupted the expression of the gene (Figures 9A and B). No obvious growth phenotypes were evident in the mutant compared to wild-type under normal growth conditions, nor upon tunicamycin treatment. These data suggest a minor role of AtCRT3 under UPR conditions, which is consistent with undetectable AtCRT3 activation upon tunicamycin application (Figure 2A). In addition, AtCRT3 is not part of the closely co-expressed ER chaperone network that contains AtCRT1a and CRT1b. However, we noticed that AtCRT3 is instead transcriptionally coordinated with several genes that are responsive to biotic and abiotic stresses (Figure 10). For example, two of the MAP kinase kinases (MAPKK), MKK1 and MKK2, are closely co-expressed with AtCRT3 (Figure 10). Both MKK1 and MKK2 appear to be part of a phosphorylation cascade that is triggered by PAMPs, such as elf18, and flg22 (For review see [35]). Consistent with this [27]; [28] recently showed AtCRT3 is necessary for elf18 perception and responses. To test whether AtCRT1a and CRT1b also participate in the responsiveness to PAMPs, we tested possible alterations in PAMP responses in the absence of these CRTs. First we grew the single-, and double mutant lines on medium containing 100 mM sucrose in the absence, or presence of elf18 or flg22 (Figure 9C). These peptides suppress anthocyanin accumulation in wild-type seedlings that are exposed to high levels of sucrose (Figure 9C). However, while no elf18-induced anthocyanin suppression was observed in Atcrt3 seedlings (Figure 9C; [27]; [28]), both the Atcrt1a and crt1b single, and the Atcrt1a crt1b double mutants showed wild-type-like suppression of anthocyanin accumulation in the presence of elf18 (Figure 9C). These results are in agreement with the recent report from Li et al. [27]. The de-repression of anthocyanin accumulation in the Atcrt3 mutants in the presence of elf18 has been attributed to the defects in the biogenesis, and stable accumulation, of the receptor-like kinase EFR that acts as the elf18 receptor (Figure 9D; [27]; [28]). Consistent with these data, we detected no significant alteration in the steady-state levels of EFR in the Atcrt1a crt1b double mutants compared to wild-type (Figure 9F, upper panel; Figure S3C).. . 10.1371/journal.pone.0011342.g009. Figure 9. . PAMP-induced responses in Atcrt mutants.. A. Schematic representation of approximate localization of the T-DNA line for Atcrt3. B. Western blot of Atcrt3 using AtCRT3 peptide antibodies (12000). C. Anthocyanin content in 6-day-old wt and mutant seedlings was determined after incubation for three days with, or without, 100 mM sucrose, and PAMPs as indicated on the right. D and E. PAMP-induced oxidative burst in 4-week-old wt and mutant seedlings. Leaf discs derived from 4-week-old plants were treated with PAMPs as described in Saijo et al. (accepted elsewhere). F. Western blot analysis of 4-week-old plant leaves. Microsomal membrane fractions were produced for the different mutants, and subjected to immuno-blot analysis with the indicated antibodies. efr1 and fls2 indicate seedlings mutated in EFR and FLS2, respectively. Ten g total protein was loaded per lane.. . . . . 10.1371/journal.pone.0011342.g010. Figure 10. . AtCRT3 co-expression relationships.. Co-expression network for AtCRT3 using the AraGenNet at http://aranet.mpimp-golm.mpg.de/aranet/ [44]. Brief annotations of genes are indicated in black boxes. Different colored edges indicate strength of transcriptional coordination. Green; mutual rank 10, Orange; mutual rank 20, Red; mutual rank 30. Low mutual rank indicates stronger co-expression relationships.. . . . The perception of PAMPs induces a transient generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) at the outer-surface of the plasma membrane [35]. While this response is readily triggered in the Atcrt3 mutant by flg22, elf18 failed to induce ROS in this mutant (Figures 9D and E; [27]; [28]). Interestingly, the ROS generation was also partially impaired in the Atcrt1a crt1b double mutants, albeit not to the same extent as in the Atcrt3 mutants, similar to what has recently been reported in [27] (Figure 9D). These data either indicate that EF receptor outputs are not fully retained in the Atcrt1a crt1b double mutant, or that the production of ROS is impaired in this mutant..
