Results. . Rescue of the seedling-lethal apyrase double knockout phenotype with tagged AtAPY1. One objective was to localize AtAPY1 at the subcellular level to learn how the protein exerts its function in plant growth. Tagging AtAPY1 was chosen over raising antibodies against it because AtAPY1 and AtAPY2 are so identical in their amino acid (aa) sequence: There is only one six-aa-stretch in AtAPY1 (aa 44-49) that has four different and two similar aa to the corresponding sequence in AtAPY2. [43]. All other stretches of differences between the two sequences comprise only one or two aa.. Among the tags available, the SNAP-tag. [44,45] seemed the most suitable. As an O6-alkylguanine-DNA alkyltransferase, SNAP binds covalently to benzylguanine-based substrates. There are a large number of substrates coupled to different fluorescent dyes and other labels commercially available making the SNAP-tag a versatile tool for localization studies. The expression of AtAPY1-SNAP was placed under the control of the native promoter region, because overexpression can lead to localization artifacts. Despite this risk, another tagged AtAPY1 version, AtAPY1-GFP, was fused to the strong cauliflower mosaic virus 35S promoter because expression levels of NTPDases are generally low. [46].. The SNAP- or GFP-tag was fused to the C-terminus of AtAPY1 to avoid losing the tag by a possible N-terminal cleavage in a subcellular targeting process. Since tags can impair protein function and lead to mislocalization. [47], a complementation strategy was performed. The knockout of AtAPY1 and AtAPY2 (DKO) is seedling-lethal. [18]. A DKO seedling should survive if it is complemented with a tagged AtAPY1 that is functional and correctly localized. However, the use of the 35S promoter made the rescue of the DKO mutant with AtAPY1-GFP impossible as confirmed experimentally, because this promoter is turned off in pollen. [48]. Without AtAPY1-GFP in the DKO pollen, no progeny will form, because the presence of either AtAPY1 or AtAPY2 is prerequisite for pollen to germinate. [17]. In order to overcome this hurdle, partially complemented apyrase apy2 SKO plants (= +/apy1; apy2/apy2; SPIK::AtAPY2) were used as the genetic background for transformation with each tagged AtAPY1 construct. These plants carried AtAPY2 under the control of the pollen-specific promoter SPIK which ensured the survival of the DKO pollen.. DNA was isolated from progeny of the partially complemented SKO plants containing either AtAPY1::AtAPY1-SNAP or 35S::AtAPY1-GFP and used for genotyping by PCR. Several DKO plants without a WT AtAPY1 and AtAPY2 gene, but with a tagged apyrase construct were identified hereafter called DKO-SNAP and DKO-GFP, respectively. The PCR analysis of two such mutants is shown in Figure. 1A. The SPIK::AtAPY2 construct was always present in the DKO-GFP mutants as expected, but interestingly also in the DKO-SNAP mutants. One possible explanation is that some regulatory elements necessary for optimal expression in pollen were missing in the chosen promoter region. The promoter region used previously for AtAPY1::GUS analyses. [12,17,18] was 1kb longer at the 3end including almost the entire gene (At3g04090) upstream of AtAPY1. Since the gene At3g04090 was deemed unnecessary for successful complementation, it was mostly excluded in the AtAPY1::AtAPY1-SNAP construct.. . Figure 1. . Identification of apyrase double knockouts complemented with AtAPY1::AtAPY1-SNAP or 35S::AtAPY1-GFP. (A) Genomic DNA was isolated from DKO plants complemented with either AtAPY1::AtAPY1-SNAP (DKO-SNAP) or 35S::AtAPY1-GFP (DKO-GFP) and subjected to PCR analysis. The PCR products for AtAPY1 (1.0kb), AtAPY2 (0.9kb), the T-DNA null mutations apy1 (0.7kb) and apy2 (0.6kb), AtAPY1-SNAP (0.6kb), AtAPY1-GFP (0.7kb) and SPIK::AtAPY2 (0.4kb) were analyzed by agarose gel electrophoresis. Genomic DNA from plants which had been tested positive for the respective amplification products before served as the positive controls (+). The negative PCR controls (-) were run without addition of any DNA template. (B) The phenotype of the WT, the DKO and the DKO rescued with either the SNAP- or GFP-tagged AtAPY1 are shown. The genetic backgrounds are represented by colored symbols. Images of 8-d- (WT), 14-d- (DKO), 7-d- (DKO-SNAP), 7-d-old (DKO-GFP) seedlings and of 30-d-old adult plants were taken. Scale bars equal 1cm.. . . . To confirm that the SNAP- and GFP-tagged AtAPY1 could rescue the lethal DKO seedling phenotype, the seedling phenotype of complemented SKO and DKO plants in comparison with the WT and DKO seedlings was analyzed (Figure. 1B). SKO-SNAP (+/+; apy2/apy2; SPIK::AtAPY2; AtAPY1::AtAPY1-SNAP) and SKO-GFP (apy1/apy1; +/+; SPIK::AtAPY2; 35S::AtAPY1-GFP) plants were included in the study to check for possible dominant negative effects of the tagged apyrase on the WT phenotype. DKO seedlings without a construct coding for a tagged AtAPY1 had an abnormal phenotype with fleshy cotyledons and no root (Figure. 1B;. [18]). These seedlings did not develop beyond this stage. DKO plants expressing AtAPY1-SNAP or AtAPY1-GFP, on the other hand, showed no phenotypical differences to WT plants (Figure. 1B) and SKO mutants (data not shown).. The lethal DKO (apy1/apy1; apy2/apy2; SPIK::AtAPY2) could be rescued by transformation with AtAPY1-SNAP or AtAPY1-GFP making the DKO-SNAP and DKO-GFP plants suitable tools for localization studies.. . . AtAPY1 is present in punctate structures, but not at the plasma membrane or extracellular space. For localization of AtAPY1 at the subcellular level by confocal microscopy, living DKO-SNAP seedlings were incubated with SNAP-compatible fluorescent substrates to label the AtAPY1-SNAP fusion protein. Two cell-permeable, fluorescent substrates were used: red fluorescent tetramethylrhodamine-Star and the green fluorescent BG-505 (both kindly provided by Andreas Brecht, formerly Covalys Biosciences, Basel, Switzerland). Although specific labeling of fusion proteins in vivo was successful in yeast. [49] and animal as well as human cell cultures. [50-52], a high background made the detection of AtAPY1-SNAP-specific signals in Arabidopsis seedlings impossible. The tested dyes passed the cell wall and entered the cell, but even 14-h washing steps could not remove the excess fluorescent substrate (data not shown).. Therefore, indirect immunofluorescence was chosen as a different approach. DKO-SNAP seedlings were fixed. After cell wall digestion and plasma membrane permeabilization, they were incubated with primary antibodies against the SNAP-tag. Following several washing steps, FITC-labeled secondary antibodies were added to visualize AtAPY1-SNAP for the CLSM. The background was low, but no specific signals could be detected (data not shown). To increase the fluorescent signal, the tyramide signal amplification (TSA) technique was applied. [53]. This technique employs peroxidase activity to covalently couple a large number of labeled substrates in the immediate vicinity. Therefore, instead of FITC-labeled secondary antibodies, HRP-labeled antibodies were added in combination with FITC-coupled tyramides. TSA improved the signal-to-noise ratio and intracellular dot-like structures became visible in DKO-SNAP seedlings (Figure. 2A) which were not found in the WT (Figure. 2B). Root hairs were selected as suitable cell types for localization, because promoter-glucuronidase analyses suggested that AtAPY1 is expressed strongly in root hairs as well as in guard cells among other cell types. [12,18].. . Figure 2. . AtAPY1 is present in intracellular dot-like structures, but absent from the extracellular space. CLSM (A, B, E-J) and fluorescence microscopy (C, D) images of various cell types are depicted. All WT control images were captured using the identical CLSM settings as for the corresponding images of the transgenic plants. The FITC, Alexa Fluor 488 and GFP fluorescence is shown in green, the chlorophyll autofluorescence in magenta. The fluorescence signals are overlaid with a bright field image in A, B, E and F. Scale bars=20mum. (A, B) Root hairs of DKO-SNAP and WT seedlings were fixed and successively incubated with alpha-SNAP antibodies and secondary alpha-rabbit IgG coupled with horseradish peroxidase. FITC tyramides were added to amplify the fluorescence signal. The parameters of the indirect immunofluorescence detection were modified in multiple independent experiments until FITC-specific fluorescence signals as shown here were obtained. (C, D)Two hundred-nm Tokuyasu cryo-sections through root tips of AtAPY1-GFP expressing seedlings were fixed and incubated with (C) or without (D) alpha-GFP antibodies. All samples were incubated with secondary alpha-rabbit Fab fragments coupled with Alexa Fluor 488. The pictures (C) and (D) were taken with the same exposure times. (E, F) Two guard cells of a 35S::AtAPY1-GFP transgenic and WT seedling are depicted. The dot-like green fluorescent signals were obtained in at least 20 independent live imagings. (G) A protoplast expressing AtAPY1-GFP and a WT protoplast (H), both prepared from cotyledons, were imaged. Overlays of the green and magenta fluorescent signals are shown. These images represent the results from three independent protoplastations. (I, J) The GFP fluorescence and the bright field image of the same epidermal section of a cotyledon from an AtAPY1-GFP overexpressing seedling grown under alkaline conditions are shown representative of the imaging results from three seedlings. Doughnut- or horseshoe-shaped fluorescent structures typical of Golgi stacks imaged from the top are indicated by white arrows.. . . . To overcome the weak expression levels of AtAPY1, the indirect immunofluorescence approach was repeated with transgenic plants expressing AtAPY1-GFP under the control of the strong 35S promoter. We used primary antibodies against GFP and secondary Alexa Fluor 488-coupled antibodies in two different approaches: 1. Post-embedding labeling of 200-nm-thin Tokuyasu cryo-sections (Figure. 2C, D), and 2. Pre-embedding labeling followed by embedding in Technovit 7100 resin and sectioning (Additional file. 3). In both experiments, the intracellular punctate signals could be confirmed in the root (Figure. 2C) and in root hairs (Additional file. 3). No signals were detected in the cell wall and at the plasma membrane and in the control without primary antibody (Figure. 2D).. To verify the imaging data obtained by immunofluorescence, a second detection method was used. The transgenic plants expressing AtAPY1GFP were imaged in vivo by CLSM. Here, the same intracellular punctate pattern as found before in AtAPY1-SNAP and AtAPY1-GFP expressing plants was observed in guard cells (Figure. 2E), cotyledon epidermis (Additional file. 4A), hypocotyls (Additional file. 4B) and roots (Additional file. 4C). The WT control did not present this punctate pattern as shown exemplarily for WT guard cells (Figure. 2F). Expression of the GFP-tag alone led to cytoplasmic staining. [28].. The method of live imaging of GFP-tagged proteins is suitable to detect apyrase in the cell wall as shown for apoplastic apyrases in other plant species. [16,54]. But since AtAPY1 was expected to be localized extracellularly and since GFP does not fluoresce atpH 5.0. [55], a weak AtAPY1-GFP signal could be missed if the tag were exposed to the acidic environment of the cell wall. To provide an optimal pH for GFP fluorescence in the extracellular environment, WT protoplasts and those expressing AtAPY1-GFP were prepared from cotyledons and imaged at pH 7.6. As before, intracellular GFP signals were found (Figure. 2G) which did not appear in the WT control (Figure. 2H), but the plasma membrane of the transgenic protoplasts did not fluoresce (Figure. 2H). This result ruled out the possibility that AtAPY1 was anchored in the plasma membrane. However, protoplastation represents severe stress for the cells which could have caused down regulation of AtAPY1 and/or degradation or internalization of AtAPY1. In addition, AtAPY1 was a possibly soluble protein in the cell wall and in this case the digestion of the cell wall during protoplast preparation would have led to a loss of the AtAPY1-GFP signal. Therefore, cells with intact walls were imaged at a pH suitable for GFP fluorescence (Figure. 2I, J). Seedlings expressing 35S::AtAPY1-GFP were grown in liquid culture at pH of 8.1 instead of 5.7. The higher pH in the culture medium is known to recover GFP fluorescence in the apoplast. [38]. However, even under these conditions, no extracellular GFP signal was detectable (Figure. 2I). In addition, 35S::AtAPY1-GFP seedlings were cultured under normal conditions to minimize any impact the alkaline culture medium may have on AtAPY1 distribution and infiltrated with buffer of pH 7.5 just for imaging. Again no extracellular signals were found in more than 30 independent experiments (data not shown).. Both detection methods, immunofluorescence and in vivo imaging, revealed the same punctate structures, but no signals at the plasma membrane or in the extracellular space.. . . AtAPY1 is localized in the Golgi apparatus. At higher magnifications, some of the AtAPY1-specific punctate signals appeared as doughnut- or horseshoe-shaped structures (see Figure. 2I). This morphology is typical of Golgi stacks viewed in the middle of the main cisternae from the top. [56]. In addition, the observed size between 0.5 to 1mum across matched the expected size of Golgi stacks. [57]. In order to corroborate that AtAPY1 was localized in these organelles, the dye FM4-64 was applied. FM4-64 is endocytosed by the cell, sequentially staining the plasma membrane, endosomes and the trans-Golgi network, but not the Golgi apparatus. [58]. Imaging FM4-64-infiltrated 35S::AtAPY1-GFP seedlings did not reveal any co-localization of the fluorescent dye and the GFP signal, even 120min after the infiltration (Figure. 3A and corresponding scatterplot in Figure. 3E).. . Figure 3. . Identification of AtAPY1-positive structures as Golgi. CLSM images of epidermal cells from cotyledons are shown. The GFP fluorescence is shown in green, the FM4-64 (A), YFP (B, D) and RFP (C) fluorescence in magenta. The images from the two fluorescence detection channels were merged with the Co-localization Finder plugin (= overlay) and co-localization of the green and magenta signals resulted in white spots. Scale bars=20mum. (A) Transgenic seedlings expressing AtAPY1-GFP were treated with 15muM FM4-64 by vacuum-infiltration. A section of the lower epidermis is shown after 120min of treatment. (B) Two guard cells of a transgenic seedling co-expressing AtAPY1-GFP and YFP-Rab E1d are shown. (C, D) Transgenic seedlings co-expressing AtAPY1-GFP and either RFP-MEMB12 or YFP-SYP32 were imaged. (E) The distribution of the green and magenta pixels in the dual-channel overlay images in A-D were analyzed with the ImageJ Colocalization Threshold and Coloc2 tool. The x-axes represent the intensities of the green pixels from the GFP channel (AtAPY1) and the y-axes from the magenta channel (FM4-64, Rab E1d, MEMB12 or SYP32). For each scatterplot, the intensities are given as the pixel grey values ranging from 0 to 255. Co-localization clusters the pixels from both channels along a diagonal line. The maximal theoretical value for the Pearsons correlation coefficient (Rr) is 1.0.. . . . As an additional negative endosomal control, co-localization with the GTPase Rab E1d was studied. There is some controversy in the literature over the designation of Rab E1d as a marker protein for the Golgi. [59] or the post-Golgi/endosomal compartment. [32]. However, there is consensus that Rab E1d primarily co-localizes with rat sialyltransferase. [59,60], a trans-Golgi and/or trans-Golgi network marker protein. [61], and that it also associates with the plasma membrane (PM). [60,62]. Therefore, Rab E1d is believed to play a role in the trafficking of secretory vesicles from the Golgi to the PM. [59,60].. In transgenic plants co-expressing YFP-Rab E1d and AtAPY1-GFP, no overlap of the YFP and GFP fluorescence was found (Figure. 3B and corresponding scatterplot in Figure. 3E). The lack of overlap not only suggests the absence of AtAPY1-GFP in endosomes, but also ruled out crosstalk between the GFP and YFP detection channels. In order to confirm that the chosen GFP and YFP settings were specific for the detection of the GFP and YFP fluorescence, respectively, transgenic plants expressing only one of the two fluorophores were imaged sequentially with the GFP and YFP settings. When imaging epidermal cells from the AtAPY1-GFP expressing plant with the GFP settings, the familiar dot-like structures appeared in the GFP detection channel (Additional file. 5A). Taking an image of the identical epidermal section with the YFP settings, however, did not deliver this punctate pattern (Additional file. 5A). The same imaging experiment with a plant expressing YFP-SYP32 only, showed negligible bleed-through of the YFP fluorescence into the GFP detection channel (Additional file. 5B). These control experiments demonstrated the specificity of the GFP and YFP detection settings.. In a direct localization approach, the occurrence of AtAPY1-GFP in the Golgi apparatus was investigated by co-localization with three known Arabidopsis Golgi-resident proteins. MEMB12 (Membrin 12) and SYP32 (Syntaxin of plants 32) are SNARE proteins localized in the Golgi apparatus. [63]. Got1p (Golgi transport 1 protein) was found in the Golgi membranes of Saccharomyces cerevisiae[64] and its homolog in Arabidopsis was also localized in the Golgi. [32]. Transgenic plants co-expressing AtAPY1-GFP and either the Golgi marker RFP-MEMB12 (Figure. 3C), the YFP-SYP32 (Figure. 3D) or YFP-Got1p homolog (Additional file. 6) were analyzed by confocal microscopy. The fluorescence of all three Golgi marker proteins overlapped with the AtAPY1 fluorescence, localizing AtAPY1-GFP to the Golgi apparatus.. To exclude or confirm a co-localization not only by eye, the ImageJ software was applied. The overlays of the images from the two detection channels were used to generate scatterplots and to calculate the Pearsons correlation coefficient (Rr) of the two fluorescent signals (Figure. 3E and Additional file. 6). Rr values>0.5 indicate co-localization. [65], verifying co-localization of all three marker proteins RFP-MEMB12, YFP-SYP32 and YFP-Got1p homolog with AtAPY1-GFP.. In order to confirm the co-localization results, AtAPY1-GFP was labeled with gold particles using alpha-GFP primary antibodies and secondary gold-coupled secondary antibodies. Electron microscopy of Tokuyasu cryo-sections through roots revealed weak, but specific staining of Golgi stacks (Figure. 4A,B). In sections through 56 Golgi compartments (48 labeled, 8 unlabeled) equaling an area of 11.8mum2, 8.3 gold particles per mum2 were counted. Considering only labeled Golgi compartments increased the value to 9.8 particles per mum2. By comparison, only 0.37 and 0.07 gold particles per mum2 were found in sections through 88 mitochondria (= 14mum2) and 12 nuclei (= 27mum2), respectively. Multivesicular bodies (MVB) were also positively immunolabeled by gold particles (Figure. 4C) which most likely reflects the transport of some AtAPY1-GFP to the vacuole as seen in other GFP-overexpressing plants. [59] rather than a functional role of AtAPY1 in this prevacuolar compartment. No immunolabeling of any other cellular compartment including the cell wall was found (Figure. 4D). In summary, the immunogold labeling studies of AtAPY1-GFP confirmed its localization in the Golgi and gave no indication of an extracellular occurrence.. . Figure 4. . Confirmation of the Golgi localization of AtAPY1 by immunogold labeling. (A-D) Transverse Tokuyasu-cryo-sections through root tips were imaged by TEM after imunogold labeling of AtAPY1-GFP using alpha-GFP antibodies (Torrey Pines) and Protein A 10-nm gold. Arrows mark gold particles. Independent experiments with Protein A 6-nm gold gave the same localization results presented here. Both approaches were repeated three times. Abbreviations: cw, cell wall, g, golgi stack, mvb, multivesicular body. Scale bars equal 200nm in A and 500nm in B-D.. . . . . . AtAPY1 has the substrate specificity typical of an endo-, not an ecto-apyrase. If the Golgi localization of AtAPY1 were correct, AtAPY1 should exhibit the substrate specificity typical of Golgi apyrases. Therefore, the activity of AtAPY1-GFP was tested in the presence of known apyrase substrates at pH 6.5 which equals the pH found in the Golgi. [55]. AMP is not a substrate for apyrases and for this reason served as a negative control. AtAPY1-GFP did not hydrolyze ATP and ADP, the typical substrates of ecto-apyrases. [46], but the nucleotides uridine diphosphate (UDP), guanosine diphosphate (GDP) and inosine diphosphate (IDP) (Figure. 5). No activity was detectable in the presence of all other NTPs or NDPs (Figure. 5) and AMP (data not shown). Hydrolysis of these three NDPs matches the substrate specificity of other plant Golgi apyrases, e. g. from rice (Oryza sativa). [66] and sycamore (Acer pseudoplatanus). [67].. . Figure 5. . Substrate specificity of AtAPY1-GFP. The activity of AtAPY1-GFP in the presence of various substrates at pH 6.5 was measured. Different letters above the columns indicate mean values that are significantly different from one other (p<0.05, Tukey test). Error bars represent standard deviations of duplicate measurements from one reaction (see Methods). The data are representative of five activity assays with independent protein extracts. Abbreviation: Pi, inorganic phosphate.. . . . In order to investigate the possibility that the substrate specificity was pH-dependent and that it would change in favor of ATP and ADP once AtAPY1 reached the apoplast, the activity assay of AtAPY1-GFP was repeated at pH 5.5, the pH typically found in the cell wall. [68]. However, the three diphosphates UDP, GDP and IDP remained the only substrates (Additional file. 7). Therefore, the determined substrate specificity substantiated the results that AtAPY1 was not observed in the cell wall, but in the Golgi.. . . AtAPY1 is an integral membrane protein. One objective was to determine if AtAPY1 was a soluble protein in the lumen of the Golgi or, as implied by the TMHMM prediction program. [69], a Golgi membrane protein with an uncleaved signal sequence at the N-terminus serving as a transmembrane anchor (Figure. 6A). This prediction was supported by the immunogold labeling results which suggested a membrane association of the protein (Figure. 4A-C).. . Figure 6. . Analysis of the solubility of AtAPY1-GFP.(A) The output of the TMHMM prediction program. [69] is shown. The AtAPY1 aa sequence is represented along the x-axis with the N-terminal aa being the first residue. The probability for each aa to appear within a transmembrane domain (TM) is given. One TM is predicted which comprises the aa 21-43. (B) Microsomal membranes were prepared from transgenic plants containing 35S::AtAPY1-GFP. Equal amounts of membrane fractions were treated either with extraction buffer, 0.2% SDS, 2M NaCl, 0.2M Na2CO3 or 4M urea. After a 30-min treatment, the proteins were subjected to centrifugation at 100,000g. The pellet fractions (P) and the supernatants (S) were separated in a 8% SDS polyacrylamide gel, blotted on a nitrocellulose membrane and incubated with alpha-GFP antibodies. The molecular weights of the protein standard are given in kDa. The AtAPY1-GFP protein (80kDa) and a second band at 27kDa (arrow) were detected with alpha-mouse IgG coupled with horseradish peroxidase. Similar results were obtained in three experiments with independent protein extracts.. . . . Microsomal membranes were isolated from transgenic AtAPY1-GFP seedlings and their purity was verified with antibodies against marker proteins for cytosolic and insoluble proteins (Additional file. 8). The microsomal membranes were treated with various solubilizing agents and then analyzed for any solubilized proteins. Using alpha-GFP antibodies, a major signal was observed at the expected molecular mass of AtAPY1-GFP (80kDa) and a minor signal at 27kDa (Figure. 6B). The smaller protein most likely represents a degradation product of AtAPY1-GFP resulting from the protein extraction procedure. If the microsomal membranes were left untreated, AtAPY1-GFP was detected in the membrane fraction (Figure. 6B), suggesting that the protein was membrane-bound. In support of this finding, the detergent SDS released the majority of the AtAPY1-GFP protein from the membranes (Figure. 6B). In order to differentiate between AtAPY1 being a peripheral or an integral membrane protein, the microsomal membranes were subjected to high salt (2M NaCl), alkaline (0.2M Na2CO3) and denaturing (4M urea) conditions. Peripheral proteins are removed from membranes by urea which disturbs protein-protein interactions or by high salt and alkaline treatments which disrupt electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions, respectively. Except for trace amounts, the salt and Na2CO3 treatment did shift AtAPY1 from the pellet fraction to the supernatant (Figure. 6B) as expected for an integral membrane protein. AtAPY1 is also not a Golgi soluble protein, because AtAPY1 remained in the pellet fraction after Na2CO3 treatment which is known to leach the soluble proteins from the microsomal lumen into the supernatant fraction as shown in. [70]. Urea released some AtAPY1-GFP protein into the supernatant, but most of the protein remained in the membrane fraction (Figure. 6B). Although transmembrane proteins are generally not extracted by urea at all, type II integral proteins seem to be less tightly associated with the membrane than proteins with multiple transmembrane domains. [71].. In summary, AtAPY1 showed the characteristics of a single-pass type II membrane protein..
