Results. . A TIC mutant reduces root meristem size in a circadian clock-independent manner. It has been reported that TIC is involved in JA-mediated root development. However, a 10-d-old tic-2 mutant had a similar root length to that of wild type in the absence of exogenous methyl jasmonate (Shin et al., 2012). To further investigate the function of TIC in root elongation, we measured the root length of tic-2 and wild-type plants. Our data showed that primary root elongation was retarded in the tic-2 mutant at either 3 or 4 d after germination (DAG), whereas no obvious inhibition was observed after 4 DAG in the wild type (Fig. 1A), indicating a role of TIC in early root elongation. As many reports show that a shorter root length is usually associated with changes in the meristem region (Fernandez-Marcos et al., 2011; Zhang et al., 2011), we further focused our observations on the root meristem zone. Significantly reduced meristem length and cell number were assayed in tic-2 roots at 3, 4, 5, and 6 DAG compared with those of wild-type plants (Fig. 1B, C), suggesting that TIC affects root elongation by modulating meristem cell number. Interestingly, elongation zone length was not affected, and cell sizes in the maturation zone were larger in the tic-2 mutant than in the wild-type seedlings during 3-6 DAG (Fig. S1 at JXB online).. . Fig. 1.. . Reduced root meristem size in tic-2 mutant plants. (A-C) Root lengths (A), root meristem lengths (B), and root meristem cell number (C) of 3-6-d-old wild-type (WT) and tic-2 (ZT 24) plants. (D) Increase in root length of wild-type and tic-2 plants during the day and night. (E-G) Root meristem lengths (E), root meristem cell number (F), and root meristem (G) of 5-d-old wild-type and tic-2 plants at dawn and dusk. The red lines indicate the root meristem region. (H) GUS staining of CycB1;1::GUS at dawn and dusk in 5-d-old wild-type and tic-2 plants. Bars, 50 m (G, H). Data shown are means standard error of the mean (SEM) (n>30). Asterisks represents statistical significance (Students t-test, **P<0.01, ***P<0.001). The numbers in (B), (C), (E), and (F) are the percentage of root meristem size of tic-2 compared with wild-type plants. (This figure is available in colour at JXB online.). . . . As TIC is a circadian clock regulator, the photoperiod may also operate in this process. Thus, we grew the plants under several different photoperiods (8L/16, 12L/12D, 16L/8D, and 24L/0D) and measured both root meristem length and cell number. No significant difference for inhibited root meristem size and decreased cell number in tic-2 plants was detected under any of the tested photoperiods (Fig. S2 at JXB online). Furthermore, we tested whether root elongation was affected in tic-2 plants at dawn and dusk because root elongation rates have previously been reported to exhibit an oscillation (Fisahn et al., 2012). For this purpose, primary root elongations both during the day and night were examined in wild-type and tic-2 seedlings. We found that tic-2 had a similar rhythmic root elongation to wild-type plants (Fig. 1D). When meristem length and cell number were examined in the roots of wild-type and tic-2 plants at either dawn (ZT0) or dusk (ZT12), tic-2 plants had a shorter meristem length and fewer meristem cells at both dawn and dusk compared with those of wild-type plants (Fig. 1E-G).. The decreased meristem size could be due to the loss of meristematic cell division potential. This can be analysed with CycB1;1::GUS, an excellent marker for cells undergoing mitosis to monitor cell-cycle progression (Colon-Carmona et al., 1999). Thus, we crossed it with tic-2 and assayed CycB1;1 activity of the resultant line by GUS staining. The percentage of GUS-stained cells in the root meristem was significantly reduced in tic-2 plants compared with that in wild-type plants at both dawn and dusk (Fig. 1H), suggesting that the mutation in TIC reduced the competence of meristematic cells to divide. An alternative explanation for the decreased meristem size could be a reduced stem cell niche activity. We obtained tic-2 QC25::GUS by crossing tic-2 with the QC-expressed promoter trap QC25::GUS, and showed that about 16% of tic-2 QC25::GUS plants had extra QC cells, increased columella cell numbers, or additional stem cell tiers (Fig. S3 at JXB online), implying that TIC also functions in stem cell niche potential.. . . . TIC promoter is highly active in root meristem. To understand the role of TIC, the expression pattern of this gene was initially analysed with quantitative RT-PCR in different organs including root, stem, flower, leave, and green silique. We found that TIC was universally expressed in all tested organs, with the highest level in flowers (Fig. 2A). To examine its expression profile in the root in detail, we obtained transgenic lines with a GUS reporter under the control of the TIC promoter. Our GUS staining data showed that the TIC::GUS lines had a gradient staining with the strongest activity in the root meristem (Fig. 2B-E), consistent with the function of TIC in root meristem.. . Fig. 2.. . Expression pattern of TIC. (A) Quantitative RT-PCR analysis of TIC expression in 30-d-old wild-type plants. The transcript level in the flowers was set to 1. Data shown are means SEM. (B-E) Detection of GUS activity in 5-d-old TIC::GUS seedlings (ZT0) in the whole plant (B), meristem (C), elongation zone (D), and maturation zone (E). Bars, 2mm (B); 50 m (C-E). (This figure is available in colour at JXB online.). . . . . . Decreased auxin accumulation is responsible for the reduced meristem size of tic-2 roots. The fact that many mutants with low auxin levels have a reduced meristem size indicates that auxin is essential for the maintenance of root meristem (Sabatini et al., 1999; Zhou et al., 2010; Chen et al., 2011a. ). Defective root meristem patterning in tic-2 plants raised the question of whether auxin signalling was affected in tic-2 mutants. Thus, we crossed tic-2 plants with an auxin-responsive DR5::GFP marker line, whose pattern of expression provides reliable information on auxin accumulation and distribution (Ulmasov et al., 1997). The fluorescence intensity of DR5::GFP in the roots of tic-2 plants was dramatically decreased compared with that of wild-type roots at both dawn and dusk (Fig. 3A, B). Then, we directly measured endogenous IAA levels in the roots of wild-type and tic-2 plants by GC-MS. Consistent with the observations for DR5::GFP, IAA levels were significantly lower in tic-2 plants than in wild-type plants at both dawn and dusk (Fig. 3C), suggesting that the decreased auxin level could be responsible for the changed meristem size of tic-2 roots. This was further reinforced by exogenous auxin application. We treated 4-d-old tic-2 and wild-type seedlings with 100nM IAA for 24h and then measured root meristem size. Our data showed that root meristem size and cell number in tic-2 plants were remarkably increased by IAA application, indicating that exogenous auxin can partially rescue the development defect present in the root meristem of tic-2 mutants. Similar results was obtained at both dawn and dusk (Figs 3D, E and S4 at JXB online).. . Fig. 3.. . Decreased auxin accumulation in the roots of tic-2 plants. (A) Expression of DR5::GFP at dawn and dusk in 5-d-old wild-type and tic-2 plants. Bars, 50 m. (B) Quantification of DR5::GFP fluorescence at dawn and dusk in 5-d-old wild-type and tic-2 Plants. The fluorescence of wild-type plants at dawn was set to 100%. (C) IAA levels at dawn and dusk in roots of 5-d-old wild-type and tic-2 plants. (D, E) Root meristem lengths (D) and root meristem cell number (E) of wild-type and tic-2 plants in response to exogenous IAA at dawn. Data shown are means SEM (n>30). Asterisks represent statistical significance (Students t-test, *P<0.05, ***P<0.001). The percentage of root meristem size of IAA-treated seedlings compared with untreated seedlings is indicated below the corresponding bars, and these differences were statistically significant. (This figure is available in colour at JXB online.). . . . Furthermore, we investigated whether auxin regulated TIC expression. We found that TIC expression was unchanged in IAA-treated roots compared with untreated control (Fig. S5A at JXB online). This conclusion was further evidenced with TIC::GUS lines treated with or without IAA (Fig. S5B).. . . Acropetal auxin transport is reduced in tic-2 plants. The differential auxin accumulation in the primary root requires an active auxin transport, and shoot auxin can be transported acropetally to the root by auxin transporters (Dai et al., 2006). The above result that mutation in TIC decreased auxin accumulation in the roots implied that polar auxin transport might be affected in tic-2 plants. Thus, we assayed auxin transport by applying [3H]IAA to the root-shoot junction and counting radiolabelled IAA in the root tip after 10h of incubation. A significant decrease in auxin movement in tic-2 plants at both dawn and dusk was observed, suggesting that disruption of TIC caused a defect in acropetal auxin transport (Fig. 4A). These results suggested that the decreased auxin level in the root of tic-2 plants could be, at least in part, due to reduced acropetal auxin transport.. . Fig. 4.. . Reduced acropetal auxin transport in tic-2 plants. (A) Relative acropetal auxin transport in 5-d-old wild-type and tic-2 plants. The auxin transport of wild-type plants at dawn was set to 100%. Data shown are means SEM (two replicates, each with 10 seedlings). (B, C) Root meristem lengths (B) and root meristem cell number (C) of wild-type and tic-2 plants in excision experiments at dawn. Data shown are means SEM (n>30) for (B) and (C). Asterisks represent statistical significance (Students t-test, ***P<0.001).. . . . We next examine whether removing plant aerial parts affected the root meristem, as it has been reported that auxin is synthesized mainly in the shoot apex and young leaves (Ljung et al., 2001) and that shoot-derived auxin is necessary for root development (Friml et al., 2003; Wisniewska et al., 2006). The shoot parts of 4-d-old plants were excised and the remaining roots were incubated for 24h for examination of root meristem. Our results showed that shoot detachment in wild-type plants caused a significant decrease in both meristem length and cell number, resembling the phenotypes of tic-2 plants. However, the tic-2 mutant was less sensitive to shoot detachment (Fig. 4B, C). To further confirm that it was auxin from the aerial part that played an important role in maintaining root meristem size, we applied 1 muM IAA to the cut site and examined the phenotype. Consistent with our expectations, IAA application to the root-shoot junction restored the short-meristem phenotype (Fig. 4B, C). Similar results were obtained at both dawn and dusk (Figs 4B, C and S6 at JXB online).. In addition, we also assayed the expression of auxin synthesis genes by quantitative RT-PCR in the roots of both wild-type and tic-2 plants. Among eight tested genes, the expression of ASA1, ASB1, TAA1, TAR1, TAR2, YUC1, and YUC6 was downregulated in tic-2 roots, suggesting that auxin biosynthesis was affected in tic-2 plants (Fig. S7 at JXB online).. . . . PIN genes are downregulated in tic-2. . It has been documented that PIN1, PIN2, PIN3, nd PIN7 play a critical role in controlling root meristem size (Blilou et al., 2005; Dello Ioio et al., 2008). Thus, auxin efflux PINs may be also involved in the TIC-mediated changes in auxin level in the roots. To test this, we first analysed the expression levels of these genes by quantitative RT-PCR in the roots of both wild-type and tic-2 plants and found that the transcript levels of these four PINs were dramatically repressed in tic-2 plants compared with those in wild-type plants (Fig. 5A-D). To further verify these in protein levels, four PIN reporter lines: PIN1::PIN1-GFP, PIN2::PIN2-GFP, PIN3::PIN3-GFP and PIN7::PIN7-GFP were crossed to tic-2 plants and the resultant progenies homozygous for both tic-2 and GFP reporters were selected for further confocal analysis. In agreement with the quantitative RT-PCR results, the fluorescence intensities for PIN1-GFP, PIN2-GFP, PIN3-GFP, and PIN7-GFP were remarkably reduced in tic-2 plants (Fig. 5E). Our quantification of the respective fluorescence intensities revealed a reduction in GFP signals in the root tips of tic-2 roots when compared with the same region in wild-type roots (Fig. 5F-I). Similar results were obtained at dawn and dusk (Fig. 5). Collectively, our data suggested that downregulation of PIN genes could be the cause of the reduced auxin transport in tic-2 roots.. . Fig. 5.. . The mutation in TIC represses expression of PINs. (A-D) Quantitative RT-PCR analysis of PIN1 (A), PIN2 (B), PIN3 (C), and PIN7 (D) in the roots of 5-d-old wild-type and tic-2 plants. The transcript levels of wild-type plants at dawn were set to 100%. Data shown are means SEM. (E) Expression of PIN1::PIN1-GFP, PIN2::PIN2-GFP, PIN3::PIN3-GFP, and PIN7::PIN7-GFP in the roots of 5-d-old wild-type and tic-2 plants at dawn and dusk. Bars, 50 m. (F-I) Quantification of PIN-GFP fluorescence by image analysis of confocal sections. The fluorescence of wild-type plants at dawn was set to 100%. Data shown are means SEM (n>30). Asterisks represents statistical significance (Students t-test, ***P<0.001). (This figure is available in colour at JXB online.). . . . . . Mutation of TIC represses expression of the PLT family. Maintenance of the root stem cell niche activity requires two parallel transcription factor pathways: the SCR/SHR pathway and the PLT pathway (Helariutta et al., 2000; Lim et al., 2000; Aida et al., 2004; Galinha et al., 2007). In our experiments, we first analysed the expression of the SCR/SHR genes using quantitative RT-PCR. No significant changes were assayed in tic-2 roots compared with that in wild-type roots (Fig. 6A, B). In contrast to SCR/SHR, the expression of both PLT1 and PLT2 in tic-2 plants was much lower than that in wild-type plants, demonstrating that TIC modulates the expression of PLTs (Fig. 6C, D). This was further verified using the PLT1::ERCFP marker line. The CFP fluorescence of tic-2 PLT1::ERCFP roots was dramatically reduced compared with that of the PLT1::ERCFP line (Fig. 6E). Combined with above data that a mutation in TIC results in low auxin level in the roots, these results suggested that PLT1/2, but not SCR/SHR, are downregulated by low auxin in the tic-2 mutant for reduced meristem size at either dawn or dusk.. . Fig. 6.. . Expression of SCR, SHR, and PLTs in tic-2 plants. (A-D) Quantitative RT-PCR analysis of SCR (A), SHR (B), PLT1 (C), and PLT2 (D) in the roots of 5-d-old wild-type and tic-2 plants. The transcript levels of wild-type plants at dawn were set to 100%. Data shown are means SEM. (E) Expression of PLT1::ERCFP in the roots of 5-d-old wild-type and tic-2 plants. Bars, 50 m. (This figure is available in colour at JXB online.). . . . . . . TIC regulates meristem size independently of MYC2. . Recently, TIC was shown to be a negative regulator in JA signalling by repressing MYC2 protein accumulation (Shin et al., 2012). It was also shown that JA inhibited root meristem activity in a MYC2-dependent manner (Chen et al., 2011b. ). We predicted that the short root meristem zone in tic-2 plants could be due to a high accumulation of MYC2. Thus, we crossed tic-2 and myc2-1 mutants (Boter et al., 2004) and used the resultant tic-2 myc2-1 plants for further analysis. However, in contrast to our expectations, both tic-2 and tic-2 myc2-1 mutants displayed a reduced meristem, whereas wild-type and myc2-1 plants had a similar root meristem length when the plants were grown in the absence of exogenous JA (Fig. 7A), indicating that the shortened meristem size resulting from TIC mutation might be independent of MYC2. To see whether the repression effect of JA on meristem size could be altered in tic-2 plants, 4-d-old seedlings of wild-type, tic-2, myc2-1, and tic-2 myc2-1 plants were treated with 20 muM JA for 24h and the root meristem length was measured. Our experiments showed that myc2-1 seedlings were less sensitive to JA for root meristem size compared with wild-type plants (Fig. 7), indicating the role of MYC2 in JA-mediated root meristem size, as reported previously (Chen et al., 2011b. ). In addition, tic-2 myc2-1 seedlings were less sensitive, whereas tic-2 seedlings were hypersensitive to JA (Fig. 7). This was because no MYC2 protein is expressed in tic-2 myc2-1 plants and the high accumulation of MYC2 in tic-2 is activated by JA. Similar results were obtained at both dawn and dusk, with a higher sensitivity of wild-type plants to exogenous JA in the morning than in the evening (Figs 7 and S8 at JXB online), consistent with a previous report (Shin et al., 2012).. . Fig. 7.. . . TIC mutation results in short root meristem size independent of MYC2 at dawn. (A) Root meristem lengths of wild-type, tic-2, myc2-1 and tic-2 myc2-1 seedlings with or without exogenous application of JA at dawn. (B) Relative root meristem lengths of each genotype treated with JA compared with root meristem length without JA treatment at dawn. Data shown are means SEM (n>30). Asterisks represents statistical significance (Students t-test, ***P<0.001)..
