Results. . PsLSD1 is involved in negatively regulating PCD. Previously, we cloned a reduced glutathione (GSH)-induced pea cDNA, which encodes a LITAF domain protein, and named it Pisum sativa GSH-induced LITAF domain protein (PsGILP; GenBank accession number: AAY40471.1). To identify PsGILP-interacting proteins, we used yeast two-hybrid screen to clone a pea cDNA (GenBank accession number: HQ006097). This cDNA encodes a putative protein homologous to AtLSD1 (with 72% identity), and thus was designated as PsLSD1 (Pisum sativa LSD1). The predicted PsLSD1 has 176 amino acid residues and contains three LSD1-type zinc finger motifs (Figure S1).. To investigate the function of PsLSD1, we identified an Arabidopsis T-DNA insertion line of AtLSD1 (SALK_042687, designated as lsd1-2) (Figure 1A), and obtained two independent transgenic lines over-expressing PsLSD1 in the homozygous lsd1-2 mutant (Figure 1B). We sprayed wild-type (WT), lsd1-2, and the transgenic lines with SA, which can induce PCD in lsd1-2, but not in WT [9]. By 5 days post-SA spray, lsd1-2 leaves were collapsed and completely dried, indicating significant cell death. In contrast, WT and the transgenic lines were healthy and green (Figure 1C). We quantified cell death by measuring cellular ion leakage, which correlates with plant cell death [20]. As shown in Figure 1D, lsd1-2 displayed a significant increase in conductivity, whereas the transgenic lines were basically the same as WT and exhibited only a very slight increase in conductivity. Thus, over-expression of PsLSD1 could rescue SA-induced PCD of lsd1-2, indicating that PsLSD1 is involved in negatively regulating PCD.. . 10.1371/journal.pone.0022131.g001. Figure 1. . PsLSD1 is involved in negatively regulating PCD.. (A) RT-PCR analysis of the expression of AtLSD1 in the lsd1-2 mutant. AtUBQ10 was used as an internal control. (B) Western blot analysis of transgenic plant lsd1-2/HA-PsLSD1 lines using an anti-HA monoclonal antibody. Wild-type plant was used as negative control. Various transgenic lines are numbered; NC and LC represent negative control and loading control, respectively. (C) Lesion phenotypes of various plant lines after SA treatment. Leaves were photographed at 5 days post-SA spray. Each leaf shown is a representative of about 30 leaves in three independent experiments. (D) Ion leakage profiles of various plant lines after SA treatment. At 3 days post-SA spray, conductivity of leaf discs from various plant lines was measured at the indicated time. SD indicates four independent data points. The experiment was performed three times with similar results.. . . . . . PsLSD1 is localized in the nucleus. To determine subcellular localization of PsLSD1, we constructed a fusion of the green fluorescent protein (GFP) gene and PsLSD1 driven by the CaMV 35S promoter (Figure 2A), and transfected Arabidopsis mesophyll protoplasts with the resulting construct. As shown in Figure 2B, GFP alone was distributed throughout the cytoplasm and the nucleus, whereas GFP-PsLSD1 was exclusively localized in the nucleus. This result indicates that PsLSD1 is localized in the nucleus.. . 10.1371/journal.pone.0022131.g002. Figure 2. . The NLS of PsLSD1 is located in the three LSD1-type zinc finger motifs.. (A) Schematic diagram of GFP-tagged PsLSD1 and its deletion mutants. zf1, zf2, and zf3 indicate the first, second, and third zinc finger motif, respectively. NTD and CTD represent the N- and C-terminal domain, respectively. (B) PsLSD1 is localized in the nucleus. (C) The N-terminal domain is sufficient and necessary for PsLSD1 nuclear localization. (D) All the three zinc finger motifs are necessary for PsLSD1 nuclear localization. (E) Tertiary structure of each zinc finger motif is essential for PsLSD1 nuclear localization. ZF1CA, ZF2CA, and ZF3CA indicate the mutation of the second cysteine to alanine within the first, second, and third zinc finger motif, respectively. (F) Basic residues of each zinc finger motif are essential for PsLSD1 nuclear localization. ZF1RA, ZF2RA, and ZF3RA indicate the mutation of the first arginine to alanine within the first, second, and third zinc finger motif, respectively. Arabidopsis mesophyll protoplasts were transfected with the indicated constructs, and samples were stained with DAPI to indicate positions of nuclei. Fluorescent images were taken at 12-16 h after transfection. Each protoplast shown is a representative of at least twenty protoplasts in three independent experiments. Epifluorescence (left), DAPI (middle), and merged (right) images are shown. Scale bar is 20 m.. . . . . . The NLS of PsLSD1 lies within the three zinc finger motifs. No classical NLS was found in the amino acid sequence of PsLSD1. To identify the NLS of PsLSD1, its two domains were separately fused to GFP: the N-terminal domain (NTD, aa 1-105) containing three LSD1-type zinc finger motifs, and the C-terminal domain (CTD, aa 106-176) (Figure 2A). As shown in Figure 2C, GFP-PsLSD1NTD was found predominantly in the nucleus, whereas GFP-PsLSD1CTD was found in the cytoplasm and the nucleus. This result indicates that the N-terminal domain is sufficient and necessary for PsLSD1 nuclear localization.. Since the N-terminal domain of PsLSD1 contains three zinc finger motifs, we next asked which zinc finger motifs are necessary for PsLSD1 nuclear localization. To address this question, we generated three constructs expressing GFP-tagged deletion mutants of PsLSD1 under the control of the CaMV 35S promoter: GFP-PsLSD1deltaZF1 in which aa 1 to 28 were deleted, GFP-PsLSD1deltaZF2 in which aa 46 to 67 were deleted, and GFP-PsLSD1deltaZF3 in which aa 84 to 105 were deleted (Figure 2A). Like GFP, GFP-PsLSD1deltaZF1, GFP-PsLSD1deltaZF2, and GFP-PsLSD1deltaZF3 were distributed in the cytoplasm and nucleus (Figure 2D), indicating that all the three zinc finger motifs are essential for PsLSD1 nuclear localization. Taken together, these results suggest that the three zinc finger motifs are the NLS of PsLSD1.. . . Tertiary structure of zinc finger motifs is essential for PsLSD1 nuclear localization. The four zinc-chelating cysteine residues are involved in binding to zinc ion, and thus are essential for tertiary structure of LSD1-type zinc finger motif. To determine whether zinc finger structure is essential for PsLSD1 nuclear localization, we generated three constructs in which the second zinc-chelating cysteine within each zinc finger is mutated to alanine to disrupt zinc finger structure, and analyzed their subcellular localization. As shown in Figure 2E, GFP-PsLSD1ZF1CA, GFP-PsLSD1ZF2CA, and GFP-PsLSD1ZF3CA were distributed in the cytoplasm and nucleus. This result indicates that the tertiary structure of each zinc finger motif is essential for PsLSD1 nuclear localization.. . . Basic residues of zinc finger motifs are essential for PsLSD1 nuclear localization. The primary amino acid sequence of PsLSD1 zinc finger motifs contains only seven basic residues: two, three, and two basic residues are present in the first, second, and third zinc fingers, respectively (Figures S1). To examine the role of basic residues in PsLSD1 nuclear localization, we generated three constructs in which the first arginine within each zinc finger is mutated to alanine, and analyzed their subcellular localization. As shown in Figure 2F, GFP-PsLSD1ZF1RA, GFP-PsLSD1ZF2RA and GFP-PsLSD1ZF3RA were distributed in the cytoplasm and nucleus. This result indicates that basic residues within the zinc finger motifs are essential for PsLSD1 nuclear localization.. . . The NLS of PsLSD1 binds to importin alpha. To elucidate how the NLS of PsLSD1 is involved in the nuclear import of PsLSD1, we analyzed the possible interaction between the NLS of PsLSD1 and nuclear import protein importin alpha, which recognizes the classical NLSs. The Arabidopsis genome contains nine genes encoding importin alpha isoforms [21]. We initially analyzed the interactions between four of these importin alpha isoforms (AtIMPalpha1, AtIMPalpha2, AtIMPalpha3, and AtIMPalpha4) and PsLSD1. Yeast two-hybrid assay showed that all these four importin alpha proteins associated with PsLSD1 (Figure 3A). To confirm the interaction between PsLSD1 and importin alpha, we performed in vitro GST pull-down assay. Very little MBP-PsLSD1 protein was pulled-down by GST-bound beads, whereas significantly more MBP-PsLSD1 protein was pulled-down by GST-AtIMPalpha1-bound beads (Figure 3B), indicating that PsLSD1 binds to AtIMPalpha1 in vitro.. . 10.1371/journal.pone.0022131.g003. Figure 3. . The NLS of PsLSD1 is involved in interacting with importin alpha.. (A) PsLSD1 interacts with AtIMPalpha1, AtIMPalpha2, AtIMPalpha3, and AtIMPalpha1 in yeast. pGBK-AtIMPalpha1, pGBK-AtIMPalpha2, pGBK-AtIMPalpha3, pGBK-AtIMPalpha4, and pGBKT7 were co-transformed with pGAD-PsLSD1 into yeast AH109 respectively, and beta-galactosidase activity of the resulting clones was measured. T+p53 and T+Lam are positive and negative controls for the yeast two-hybrid assay, respectively. (B) PsLSD1 directly binds to AtIMPalpha1 in vitro. Purified MBP-PsLSD1 was incubated with GST or GST-AtIMPalpha1 bound to glutathione particles. Pulled-down proteins and Input sample (purified MBP-PsLSD1) were detected by Western blot using an anti-MBP polyclonal antibody. (C) PsLSD1 interacts with AtIMPalpha1 in vivo. YN-AtIMPa1 was co-transfected with YC and YC-PsLSD1 into Arabidopsis mesophyll protoplasts, respectively, and samples were stained with DAPI to indicate positions of nuclei. Fluorescent images were taken at 12-16 h after transfection. Each protoplast shown is a representative of at least twenty protoplasts in two independent experiments. BF indicates Bright Field, and scale bar is 20 m.. . . . To further verify the interaction between PsLSD1 and AtIMPalpha1, we performed bimolecular fluorescence complementation (BiFC) assay in Arabidopsis protoplasts. As shown in Figure 3C, no fluorescence signal was observed in protoplasts co-expressing YN-AtIMPalpha1 and YC-HA (upper panel), whereas the fluorescence signal was detected in the nucleus of protoplasts co-expressing YN-AtIMPalpha1 and YC-PsLSD1 (bottom panel). This result indicates that PsLSD1 associates with AtIMPalpha1 in vivo. Taken together, these data demonstrate that PsLSD1 associates with importin alpha.. Next we carried out GST pull-down assay to analyze the interaction between the NLS of PsLSD1 and AtIMPalpha1. Figure 4 showed that the N-terminal domain, which served as the NLS, but not the C-terminal domain of PsLSD1 directly bound to AtIMPalpha1 in vitro; the N-terminal domain of PsLSD1 bound to AtIMPalpha1 with a greater intensity than full length PsLSD1 did (Figure 4). Moreover, deletion of the first, second, or third zinc finger significantly decreased the binding of PsLSD1 to At IMPalpha1 (Figure 4), suggesting that the zinc fingers are involved in direct interaction with importin alpha. Thus, our data suggest that the NLS of PsLSD1 directly binds to importin alpha in vitro.. . 10.1371/journal.pone.0022131.g004. Figure 4. . The NLS of PsLSD1 associates with AtIMPalpha1 in vitro.. Purified MBP-PsLSD1, MBP, MBP-PsLSD1NTD, MBP-PsLSD1CTD, MBP-PsLSD1deltaZF1, MBP-PsLSD1deltaZF2, and MBP-PsLSD1deltaZF3 were incubated with GST-AtIMPalpha1 or GST (control) bound to MagneGST glutathione particles, respectively. Pulled-down proteins and Input sample (purified MBP fusion proteins) were detected by Western blot using an anti-MBP polyclonal antibody. The experiments were performed two times with similar results..
