Results. . PTST Is a Highly Conserved Plant Protein. The PTST protein was previously identified as a potential candidate for involvement in starch metabolism [26]. First, we performed a phylogenetic analysis on PTST protein sequences to assess its conservation among plant species (Fig. 1). PTST was found as a single copy gene in Arabidopsis encoded by locus At5g39790. PTST sequences were highly conserved, and orthologs were found in both Embryophytes (land plants) and the Chlorophyte branch of the green algae. This suggests that the protein originated with the green lineage. Furthermore, there was a high degree of conservation among angiosperm sequences, suggesting that PTST may play an important role in this group.. . 10.1371/journal.pbio.1002080.g001. Fig 1. . Maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree of PTST proteins from the MAFFT alignment.. Angiosperm sequences are shown in red, mosses in blue, while chlorophyte sequences are shown in green. Bootstrap values that are >50 are shown over the branches. The alignment used to generate this tree is available as S1 Data.. . . . . . Knockout Mutations of PTST in Arabidopsis Result in the Production of Amylose-Free Starch. To investigate the role of PTST in starch metabolism, we obtained Arabidopsis mutant lines carrying T-DNA insertions in the PTST gene. We isolated two independent homozygous knockout lines, designated ptst-1 and ptst-2, carrying T-DNA insertions in exons 3 and 9, respectively (Fig. 2A). The exact insertion sites are presented in S1 Table. The ptst-1 mutant is in the Columbia (Col) ecotype background while ptst-2 is in the Wassilewskija (Ws) background. We analysed soluble protein extracts from leaves by immunoblotting, using antibodies raised against the recombinant Arabidopsis PTST protein. Bands corresponding to PTST at the expected molecular weight of 26 kDa were detected in wild-type Col and Ws extracts, but not in the ptst mutants (Fig. 2B), confirming that both alleles are knockouts.. . 10.1371/journal.pbio.1002080.g002. Fig 2. . . ptst knockout mutants produce amylose-free starch.. (A) Schematic illustration of the exon-intron structure of the PTST gene. Exons are represented by blue boxes. Pale blue boxes represent the 5 and 3 UTRs. Translation start (ATG) and stop (TAG) codons are indicated with arrows. Red arrows indicate T-DNA insertion sites. (B) Immunoblot detection of PTST in soluble protein extracts from leaves. The corresponding wild types to ptst-1 and ptst-2 are Columbia (Col) and Wassilewskija (Ws), respectively. (C) Representative images of 4-week-old rosettes. Plants harvested at the end of the photoperiod were cleared of chlorophyll and iodine-stained to visualise starch. Amylose-free mutants (gbss, ptst-1, and ptst-2) produce a brown staining that is distinct from the wild types.. . . . To investigate whether the ptst mutations have an impact on starch biosynthesis, plants were grown under a 12-h/12-h day/night cycle. Entire rosettes were harvested at the end of the day and stained for starch using an iodine/potassium iodide solution. Both Col and Ws wild-type plants stained a distinctive blue-brown colour, indicating the presence of amylose-containing starch. However, plants from both ptst knockout lines stained only brown, suggesting the absence of amylose. Indeed the staining was very similar to the amylose-free gbss mutant (Fig. 2C). The total starch content in leaves at this time was unaltered in the ptst and gbss mutants compared to the respective wild types (Table 1). Furthermore, starch content analysis over a 24 h period showed that the total amount of starch was not altered in either the ptst-1 or the gbss mutant at any time point (S1 Fig.). These data show that the altered staining of ptst does not simply reflect a change in the amount of starch. We further quantified the amylose content of purified starch granules using an iodine colourimetry-based method [30]. The percentage of amylose in starch was approximately 8% and 11% for wild-type Col and Ws starch, respectively (Table 1). However, both ptst mutant alleles had an amylose content that was below the detection limit of our assay. Additionally, gel permeation chromatography of dispersed starch granules over a Sepharose CL-2B column confirmed that the amylose fraction was missing from ptst starch granules (S2A Fig.). These results demonstrate that the loss of PTST results in the production of amylose-free starch.. . 10.1371/journal.pbio.1002080.t001. Table 1. . Total starch and amylose content of ptst mutants.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . Ecotype. Genotype. Total Starch Content:. Apparent Amylose Content:. . . ED. EN. Percent of Total Starch. . . . . Col-0. WT. 7.0  0.2. 0.2  0.0. 7.8  0.1. . . . . ptst-1. . 7.3  0.3. 0.1  0.0. Below detection limit. . . . . gbss. . 7.3  0.5. 0.1  0.0. Below detection limit. . . Ws. WT. 7.8  0.4. 0.2  0.0. 11.4  0.1. . . . . ptst-2. . 7.1  0.3. 0.1  0.0. Below detection limit. . . . . . . Values for starch content at end of day (ED) and end of night (EN) time points are the mean  standard error of the mean (SEM) from n = 4-5 individual plants. Amylose was measured in isolated starch granules using iodine colourimetric spectra, and represent mean  SEM from three determinations.. . . . . . Loss of PTST Results in a Dramatic Reduction of Starch-Bound GBSS Protein. GBSS is the key enzyme responsible for amylose synthesis. We investigated whether the abundance of GBSS in starch granules was altered in the ptst mutant. Granule-bound proteins were extracted by gelatinising purified starch granules in an SDS-containing medium, and subsequently visualised on silver-stained SDS-PAGE gels. GBSS was the major granule-bound protein, appearing as the dominant band at its expected molecular weight of 59 kDa (Fig. 3A). As expected, this band was absent from the starch of the gbss mutant. Surprisingly, the band was also undetectable in the ptst mutant. We conducted more sensitive analyses by immunoblotting these granule-bound protein extracts with an antiserum raised against the pea GBSS. A band corresponding to GBSS was detected on ptst starch granules, but only under high protein loading and extended exposure times for the blot (Fig. 3B and 3C). This suggests that GBSS is dramatically reduced in abundance. We repeated the immunoblotting experiment with a dilution series of the wild-type granule-bound proteins, comparing it with those from ptst, which established that the degree of reduction of GBSS on ptst starch granules is about 100-fold (S3 Fig.). . 10.1371/journal.pbio.1002080.g003. Fig 3. . The abundance of granule-bound GBSS protein is greatly reduced in ptst.. (A) Silver-stained SDS-PAGE gels of granule-bound proteins extracted from purified starch granules. Lanes were loaded according to equivalent mass of starch (1.3 mg starch). The band corresponding to GBSS is indicated. (B) Immunoblot detection of GBSS in granule-bound protein extracts. Loading was according to equivalent mass of starch (0.7 mg). (C) Same as (B), but more extract was loaded (equivalent to1.3 mg starch) and exposure time was greatly extended. (D) Immunoblot detection of PTST in granule-bound protein extracts. (E) Soluble (S) and insoluble (I) protein fractions of leaves were subject to immunoblot analysis with GBSS and PTST antibodies. Starch-bound proteins are contained in the insoluble fraction.. . . . Immunoblotting with a PTST-specific antiserum revealed that some PTST protein was bound to starch granules from wild type, even though there was no obvious band at that location on the silver-stained gel. As expected, this band was absent from the immunoblot of ptst starch-bound proteins, but also from those of the gbss mutants (Fig. 3D). Hence, the loss of either protein results in the loss of the other protein from starch. This suggests a functional interaction between GBSS and PTST on the granule.. To further investigate the granule-bound localisation of both GBSS and PTST, we sequentially extracted soluble and insoluble proteins from leaves. Granule-bound proteins are present in the insoluble fraction (since starch is insoluble), while free stromal proteins are present in the soluble fraction. The vast majority of PTST protein was in the soluble protein fraction and not granule-bound (Fig. 3E). Additionally, while the abundance of starch-bound PTST was reduced in gbss mutants (Fig. 3D), its abundance in the soluble fraction was unaltered (Fig. 3E). In contrast, GBSS was exclusively bound to starch granules in the wild type. Despite the near absence of GBSS from the starch granules of ptst mutants, we could not detect it in the soluble fraction, supporting existing speculation that unbound GBSS is degraded [16]. Additionally, we performed qPCR analyses to quantify GBSS transcript levels in ptst plants. No differences were observed in the quantity of GBSS transcripts between ptst and wild-type plants 2 h into the light period (S2 Data). This is the time point at which circadian clock-regulated GBSS expression is at its maximum level [16]. This strongly suggests that the reduction in GBSS in ptst occurs at the post-transcriptional level.. . . PTST Affects the Efficiency of GBSS Targeting to the Starch Granule. To further characterise the amylose-free phenotype of ptst, we crossed ptst-1 with two different Arabidopsis mutants that have higher amylose content-sex4 and dpe1 [4,31]. SEX4 is a glucan phosphatase required for efficient starch degradation. The sex4 mutants do not degrade as much starch at night as they make during the day, resulting in the accumulation of starch over multiple diurnal cycles [32]. Amylose can therefore be synthesised over multiple photoperiods in sex4 starch granules and reach levels exceeding 30% of total granule mass (Table 2), as opposed to wild-type granules where amylose is only synthesised over a single photoperiod and is less than 10% (Tables 1 and 2) [4]. DPE1 is a glucanotransferase involved in plastidial malto-oligosaccaharide metabolism during starch degradation. While dpe1 mutants also have a mild impairment in the rate of starch degradation, the primary reason for its high amylose content (over 20% of granule mass; see Table 2) is the accumulation of short malto-oligosaccharides, which can act as primers for GBSS activity [31,33].. . 10.1371/journal.pbio.1002080.t002. Table 2. . Amylose content of ptst double mutants.. . . . . . . . . . . . Experiment. Genotype. Apparent Amylose Content:. . . Percent of Total Starch. . . . . 1. WT. 9.7  0.4. . . . . sex4. . 31.5  0.7. . . . . ptst sex4. . 9.1  0.3. . . . . gbss sex4. . Below detection limit. . . 2. WT. 9.0  0.2. . . . . dpe1. . 21.7  0.1. . . . . dpe1 ptst. . Below detection limit. . . . . dpe1 gbss. . Below detection limit. . . . . . . Amylose was measured in isolated starch granules using iodine colourimetric spectra and represent mean  standard error of the mean (SEM) from three determinations.. . . . No amylose was detected in the dpe1 ptst double mutant, even though dpe1 single mutants had more than twice the amylose content of the wild type (Table 2). However, the ptst sex4 double mutant had intermediate levels: the amylose content was only one-third of that found in the sex4 single mutant but was comparable to the wild type (Table 2). These results were confirmed using Sepharose CL-2B chromatography (S2B Fig.). Silver-stained SDS-PAGE gels of granule-bound proteins revealed that the dpe1 and sex4 mutants had GBSS levels similar to the wild type (Fig. 4A). However, no GBSS could be detected on dpe1 ptst granules, as for the ptst single mutant. In ptst sex4 granules, GBSS was detectable but still greatly reduced compared with the wild type. These data are consistent with the idea that loss of PTST causes a dramatic reduction in GBSS targeting to starch, and thereby affects the rate of amylose synthesis. The fact that ptst sex4 had wild-type amylose levels despite having much less GBSS is consistent with the idea that amylose synthesis can proceed over many days, since the loss of SEX4 means that the starch is never fully degraded. Further evidence for this was seen when ptst sex4 rosettes were stained with iodine (Fig. 4B). Older leaves, where starch has been accumulating for the longest period of time, stained blue due to the presence of amylose, while younger leaves stained brown, suggesting they are amylose-free.. . 10.1371/journal.pbio.1002080.g004. Fig 4. . Introduction of the ptst allele into high amylose mutants.. (A) Silver-stained SDS-PAGE gels of granule-bound proteins from ptst sex4 and dpe1 ptst double mutants. Lanes were loaded according to equivalent mass of starch (1.3 mg starch). (B) Iodine stained rosettes of ptst sex4 mutants. Note that the younger leaves stain like the amylose-free gbss sex4 mutant, while older leaves stain darker.. . . . . . GBSS and PTST Interact Via Coiled Coils. The PTST protein has two recognisable domains-the coiled coil-containing domain and the CBM48 domain [26]. GBSS is also predicted to possess a coiled coil [26]. Based on the amylose-free phenotype of ptst mutants, we hypothesised that GBSS may interact directly with PTST via the coiled coils. The COILS/PCOILS server [34] predicted one coiled coil region on the Arabidopsis GBSS protein-a 14-amino-acid stretch in the C-terminal domain-with a very high probability score (Fig. 5A). This prediction for a coiled coil was conserved in all vascular plant GBSS protein sequences examined (S4A Fig.). Meanwhile, the N-terminal part of PTST was predicted to form three sequential coiled coils.. . 10.1371/journal.pbio.1002080.g005. Fig 5. . Analysis of PTST and GBSS using bioinformatic tools.. (A) COILS analysis to predict coiled coils in Arabidopsis GBSS and PTST sequences. The location of predicted coiled coils are shown with an indication of the probability score (ranging from 0 to 1, where 1 is the highest probability). (B) Homology model of the Arabidopsis GBSS based on the rice GBSS1 crystal structure. The location of the predicted coiled coil from (A) is depicted on the structure in orange. (C) Presence of surface-exposed charged side chains on the coiled coil containing helix.. . . . Using the solved protein structure of rice GBSS as a template [35], we modelled the structure of Arabidopsis GBSS using the SWISS-MODEL automated homology modelling server [36]. We located the predicted coiled coil on the model, and found that it occupied a 13-amino-acid helix exposed on the surface of the C-terminal domain (Fig. 5B). Coiled coil-mediated protein-protein binding typically involve electrostatic interactions between charged amino acids on the coiled coil [29]. While there were numerous charged amino acids present on this helix, some had buried or partially buried side chains (Glu444, Glu451, Lys453) and were unlikely to be available for protein-protein interaction. The side chains of Lys440 and Lys442 were surface exposed, but were most likely occupied in ionic interactions with Glu412 on the adjacent helix. However, three of the amino acids had surface-exposed charges that were not in the proximity of any other charged amino acids for intramolecular ionic interactions. These were Lys441, Glu449, and Glu452 (Fig. 5C). The presence of surface-exposed charges on this helix gives it strong potential for mediating protein-protein interaction.. We investigated whether PTST and GBSS proteins could interact with each other in vitro. Furthermore, we sought to determine whether the predicted coiled coil on GBSS participated in such a protein-protein interaction. To address this, we used an in vitro pull-down assay using recombinant proteins expressed in Escherichia coli. Briefly, GBSS protein with a C-terminal polyhistidine (His6) tag was incubated with an N-terminal glutathione-S-transferase (GST)-tagged PTST protein. GBSS was recovered using a Ni2+-NTA resin, which specifically binds the His6 tag. The GBSS variants tested in this assay included charge-shift mutations of the three surface-exposed charges in the coiled coil-containing helix (Lys441Glu, Glu449Lys, and Glu452Lys). Additionally, to abolish the coiled coil completely, we substituted the coiled coil-containing helix with the homologous helix from Arabidopsis SSI (with no predicted coiled coil), creating a chimeric GBSS protein (see S4B Fig. for more details).. A substantial amount of PTST protein co-eluted with wild-type GBSS, suggesting that the two recombinant proteins interact directly (Fig. 6A). No interaction occurred between free GST and GBSS, indicating that GBSS interacts specifically with PTST (S5 Fig.). Additionally, all of the charge-shift mutations in the GBSS coiled coil helix reduced the interaction in vitro. The most substantial reductions occurred when Lys441 and Glu452 were mutated to carry the opposite charge. No interaction was detected in the E452K variant or when charge-shifts were introduced in both Lys441 and Glu452 (the K441E/E452K variant). The chimeric protein that lacked the coiled coil helix altogether also did not interact with PTST. These results not only demonstrate that PTST and GBSS interact directly, but also implicate electrostatic potentials at the coiled coil region as integral to the interaction.. . 10.1371/journal.pbio.1002080.g006. Fig 6. . GBSS interacts with PTST through its coiled coil.. (A) In vitro pulldown assay using Ni2+-NTA resin against purified recombinant proteins. GBSS-His6 and GST-PTST were detected by immunoblotting with anti-His and anti-GST antibodies respectively. Wild-type GBSS specifically pulls down PTST. Charge-shift mutations at the coiled coil reduce the interaction. (B) Visualisation of GBSS activity in-gel. Recombinant proteins were separated on SDS-PAGE gel containing 0.05% (w/v) amylopectin and renatured in-gel. Following incubation with ADP-glucose, activity was visualised by staining with iodine. (C) In vivo pulldown experiment by immunoprecipitation of tandem affinity purification (TAP) (c-Myc)-tagged PTST protein transiently co-expressed with variant forms of HA-tagged GBSS in tobacco leaves. Anti-Myc and anti-HA antibodies were used to detect the precipitated PTST and GBSS proteins respectively.. . . . We assessed whether these charge-shift mutations detrimentally affected GBSS protein structure, by in-gel renaturation assays of GBSS activity. A variant carrying the Glu486Ala mutation was included as an inactive control: the corresponding residue to Glu486 in E. coli glycogen synthase (Glu377) was previously shown to be essential for catalytic activity [37]. The wild type GBSS protein elongated amylopectin chains in the gel, indicated by dark blue-staining bands with iodine (Fig. 6B). Such a band was not seen in the E486A variant. All charge-shift mutants retained activity, but none could be detected for the chimeric protein.. To investigate the interaction of the Arabidopsis GBSS and PTST proteins in planta, we conducted an immunoprecipitation experiment using transiently expressed proteins in tobacco leaves. Prey constructs were made encoding the wild-type GBSS (or its mutated variants) tagged at the C-terminus with cyan fluorescent protein (CFP) and HA tags in tandem. The bait construct encoded PTST with a C-terminal TAP tag, containing c-Myc epitopes. Agrobacteria strains containing bait or prey constructs were co-infiltrated into tobacco leaves and we confirmed that proteins were evenly expressed among different leaves. The PTST-TAP bait protein was successfully immunoprecipitated from extracted soluble proteins using anti-c-Myc beads (Fig. 6C). The wild-type GBSS was only detected in the immunoprecipitate when PTST-TAP was co-expressed, confirming the protein-protein interaction. Consistent with the findings of the in vitro pulldown assay, the charge-shift mutations of GBSS at Glu452, or both Lys441 and Glu452, markedly reduced the interaction.. . . The CBM48 Domain Is Required for Glucan Binding in PTST. A previous study demonstrated that PTST could bind to starch in vitro [26]. We compared PTST binding affinity against wild-type and amylose-free waxy (wx) maize starch granules to test whether it interacted specifically with amylose or amylopectin. Briefly, the GST-PTST recombinant protein was incubated with either wild-type or wx starch. The starch was pelleted by centrifugation, and bound proteins were eluted with SDS. We found that PTST could interact equally well with both wild-type and wx maize starch (Fig. 7), suggesting that it primarily interacts with amylopectin. Under our assay conditions, free GST did not bind to starch, suggesting that the interaction with starch is via PTST (S6A Fig.). Furthermore, the GST-PTST protein was not found in the pellet fraction when starch was substituted with Sephadex G-10 resin, suggesting that no detectable protein precipitated under these assay conditions. However, the majority of the GST-PTST protein used in the assay remained in the soluble fraction, despite the fact that starch was not limiting in our assay (S6B Fig.). This suggests that binding affinity is low, or that the interaction with starch is transient.. . 10.1371/journal.pbio.1002080.g007. Fig 7. . The CBM48 domain is required for glucan-binding in PTST.. Binding of GST-PTST recombinant protein to intact wild-type (WT) and waxy (wx) maize starch granules was assessed in vitro. Unbound proteins are in the soluble fraction (S), while bound proteins are in the pellet (P). No protein was detected in the final wash (Wf). Mutating both Trp217 and Trp255 in the CBM48 domain abolished the interaction with starch.. . . . We tested whether the conserved CBM48 domain at the C-terminus of PTST was required for glucan interaction by mutating two conserved tryptophan residues (Trp217 and Trp255) to alanine residues. These residues align with key glucan-binding tryptophans (Trp100 and Trp133) in the CBM48 of the mammalian AMP-kinase beta subunit [38]. The W217A/W255A variant of GST-PTST could not interact with either type of starch (Fig. 7), showing that the CBM48 domain is critical for starch binding.. . . PTST Is Required for GBSS Localisation on Starch Granules In Vivo. . The phenotype of Arabidopsis ptst mutants strongly suggests that the localisation of GBSS to starch granules requires PTST (Figs. 2-4). To further investigate this, we studied the localisation of fluorescently tagged Arabidopsis PTST and GBSS transiently expressed in tobacco leaves.. PTST-yellow fluorescent protein (YFP) and GBSS-CFP proteins were visualised using confocal laser scanning microscopy. When PTST-YFP was expressed alone, the YFP signal was found to co-localise with chlorophyll autofluorescence (Fig. 8A), suggesting that PTST is primarily a free soluble protein in the chloroplast stroma rather than bound to starch granules. This finding is consistent with the abundance of PTST in the soluble fraction of leaf protein extracts (Fig. 3E) and its weak interaction with starch in vitro (Fig. 7). Interestingly, a similar stromal localisation was observed for GBSS-CFP when expressed in the absence of the Arabidopsis PTST protein (Fig. 8A). However, when both proteins were co-expressed, PTST-YFP remained stromal while GBSS-CFP localised exclusively to particles within the plastid that are similar in size, shape, and number to starch granules.. . 10.1371/journal.pbio.1002080.g008. Fig 8. . Localisation of fluorescently tagged PTST and GBSS in tobacco leaves.. (A) PTST-YFP and GBSS-CFP were individually or co-expressed in tobacco epidermal cells and imaged using confocal microscopy. Note that the localisation of GBSS-CFP on starch granules depends on PTST-YFP co-expression. Bar = 10 mum. (B) Same as (A), but additionally using the W217A/W255A non-starch-binding variant of PTST. Bar = 4 mum.. . . . The above results provide direct evidence that PTST is required for GBSS localisation onto starch granules in tobacco leaves. However, the fact that PTST remained in the stroma implies that it interacted only transiently with starch during the GBSS localisation. To investigate the functional significance of this transient interaction, we conducted the experiment again with the W217A/W255A variant of the PTST protein, which cannot bind to starch (Fig. 7). We found that GBSS could only localise to the starch granule in the presence of the wild-type PTST-YFP protein, and not in the presence of the W217A/W255A variant (Fig. 8B). These data suggest that the direct interaction between PTST and starch is critical at some point in the GBSS localisation process.. . . GBSS Overexpressed in Arabidopsis Requires PTST to Efficiently Localise to Starch. If PTST is required for GBSS to localise to starch granules, it would be expected that the loss of PTST might cause an accumulation of unbound GBSS in the stroma. However, GBSS was not detected in the soluble fraction of ptst mutants (Fig. 3E), most likely because free GBSS is unstable. Therefore, we constitutively overexpressed GFP-tagged Arabidopsis GBSS under the 35S promoter in both wild-type and ptst-1 plants, isolating multiple independent lines of each. Expression levels of GBSS-GFP varied among transformants. When expressed in wild-type plants (35S::GBSS-GFP lines), we found that GBSS-GFP was almost exclusively in the insoluble fraction (i.e., localised onto starch granules), even in lines where expression was very strong (Fig. 9, lines #1-1, #2-2). In contrast, when GBSS-GFP was overexpressed in ptst mutants (ptst-35S::GBSS-GFP lines), GBSS-GFP was found primarily in the soluble fraction. This further substantiates the finding that GBSS localisation onto starch granules is inefficient in the absence of PTST. Also, GBSS-GFP protein levels were generally low in ptst mutants, and we were not able to isolate lines with levels of expression comparable to the most highly expressing wild-type transformants (e.g., Fig. 9, line #1-1). The lower abundance of GBSS-GFP in the ptst background is consistent with the hypothesis that free GBSS is unstable and prone to degradation in the chloroplast stroma.. . 10.1371/journal.pbio.1002080.g009. Fig 9. . Expression of GBSS-GFP in Arabidopsis ptst mutants.. Soluble (S) and insoluble (I) protein fractions of leaf extracts were subject to immunoblot analysis with GFP antibodies. Three independent lines generated in both wild-type and ptst-1 backgrounds are shown, each with varying expression levels. Starch-bound proteins are contained in the insoluble fraction. The small difference in migration between soluble and insoluble fractions was reproducibly observed and may be due to differences in sample preparation and composition..
