Results. . DPMP elicits CaBP22. . -333. . ::GUS expression. Synthetic elicitors identified by our high throughput screen can be categorized into several structural classes. One structural class, phenyl-imino-methyl-phenol derivatives (PMPs) and related compounds, are represented by more than 30 members in our original set of 114 synthetic elicitor candidates. PMPs share a phenyl-imino-methyl-phenol skeleton. The PMP, 2,4-dichloro-6-{(E)-[(3-methoxyphenyl)imino]methyl}phenol (DPMP) particularly strongly induced CaBP22-333::GUS expression. One week-old liquid-grown Arabidopsis CaBP22-333::GUS seedlings continuously exposed to DPMP at a concentration as low as 1muM for 24h exhibited GUS reporter gene expression (see Supplementary Fig. S1a). We further tested for possible synthetic elicitor-induced phytotoxicity by trypan blue staining of CaBP22-333::GUS seedlings 24h after incubation with various concentrations of DPMP (see Supplementary Fig. S1b). The results shown in Supplementary Fig. S1a and b can be compared, as the same types of treatment were performed. Seedlings treated with a concentration of 500muM DPMP stained dark blue, indicating extensive cell death. While some cell death may occur at intermediate concentrations (50muM and 100muM), no cell death was observed at lower concentrations (1muM, 3muM and 10muM), which induce CaBP22-333::GUS expression. Thus, DPMP-mediated phytotoxicity is not responsible for expression of this defense-associated reporter gene, but it may be the cause of the observed decline of GUS activity at higher concentrations.. . . DPMP induces rapidly and transiently disease resistance of Arabidopsis against Hpa. We further examined whether DPMP induces disease resistance against the pathogenic oomycete Hpa in soil-grown plants. Wild type seedlings of the Arabidopsis ecotype Columbia (Col-0) were pretreated with different concentrations of DPMP once by a single foliar spray application 24h prior to infection with the virulent Hpa isolate Noco2 (HpaNoco2). Hpa spores were counted 7 days post infection (dpi). Plants sprayed with concentrations as low as 1muM of DPMP showed a significant reduction in spore production compared to mock-pretreated plants (Fig. 1) and at 10muM DPMP, this effect reached its maximal level of HpaNoco2 immunity. Compared to our previously characterized synthetic elicitors DCA and BHTC3031, DPMP displayed maximal suppression of spore formation at 10 times lower concentrations.. Based on the dose-response data shown in Fig. 1, we estimated the median effective concentration (EC50) of DPMP regarding its ability to protect Arabidopsis from HpaNoco2 as 514nM (see Supplementary Fig. S2). This value is much lower than those estimated for DCA and BHTC, which are 6.5muM and 5.5muM, respectively3031. Although these EC50 values are only estimations based on extrapolations of a small number of measurements, it is clear from our data that the EC50 values for Hpa protection assays of DCA and BHTC are substantially above 1muM, while that of DPMP is below 1muM. These results suggest that DPMP is particularly potent in mediating protection of Arabidopsis against Hpa infections. This may be due to efficiency regarding its uptake and/or ability to interact with its targets, but may also have different reasons, as we cannot rule out toxicity of DPMP against Hpa.. We further analyzed the kinetics of DPMP-induced defense induction and compared it with the kinetic behavior of other synthetic elicitors. Col-0 plants were pretreated with 100muM of BHTC, DCA or INA or 10muM of DPMP at various time points ranging from 1hour to 6 days prior to pathogen challenge (Fig. 2). At these concentrations each of the tested compounds exhibits maximal activity. Mock treatment itself reduced spore growth when time points between HpaNoco2 infection and chemical treatment were less than one day apart. This effect is likely due to residual liquid coating of plants before being treated with pathogen. At 1-hour post treatment (hpt), all of the tested chemicals reduced Hpa spore production (Fig. 2). At 1-day post treatment (dpt), 10muM DPMP exhibited a similar strength of defense induction as 100muM DCA or 100muM INA. Of all of four tested treatments, BHTC showed the weakest activity in inducing disease resistance.. Between 3 and 6 dpt, levels of DPMP-mediated immunity began to decline while. INA-mediated immunity remained constant. At 6 dpt, DPMP did not trigger any significant immunity against the pathogen. Consistent with previous reports, DCA and BHTC also induced plant immunity transiently3031, while the activity of INA is long-lasting273221. Taken together, our results clearly showed that the defense-inducing activity of DPMP against HpaNoco2 is stronger than that of other synthetic elicitors we characterized before. Furthermore, its activity is rapid and transient, like that of DCA and BHTC.. . . DPMP provides disease protection against the bacterial plant pathogen Pseudomonas syringae. We further tested the ability of DPMP to induce resistance against the virulent bacterial plant pathogen Pseudomonas syringae pathovar tomato strain DC3000 (Pst). Arabidopsis plants were pretreated with synthetic elicitors at concentrations at which they trigger strong immunity against Hpa 24h prior to dip-inoculation with Pst. As with INA and DCA, DPMP-pretreated plants showed a significant reduction in bacterial growth (Fig. 3a). To test for a potential direct toxic activity of DPMP against bacteria, we grew Pst in liquid medium containing DPMP, other synthetic elicitors or the antibiotic hygromycin. None of the tested synthetic elicitors reduced bacterial growth, while hygromycin completely eliminated growth of Pst (Fig. 3b). DPMP is also effective in tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) against Pst at a dose at which it is non-toxic for these bacteria. We repeated the experiment shown in Fig. 3b with a DPMP concentration of 50muM and did not observe toxicity against Pst (data not shown). For our tomato/Pst assays, we tested both foliar-spray and root-drench application and found the latter to be more efficient. Tomato plants root drenched with 50muM DPMP displayed a significant reduction in Pst growth in leaves three days post infection relative to plants treated with a mock solution (Fig. 3c). In previous experiments31, 200muM of BHTC were needed for similar results in tomato against Pst, confirming that DPMP is a more potent synthetic elicitor than BHTC. Taken together, DPMP can induce plant immunity against Pst without being directly toxic to this pathogen.. . . DPMP interacts with targets operating downstream or independently from SA biosynthesis and is fully dependent on NPR1. To determine the mode of action of this new synthetic elicitor, we analyzed the defense-inducing activity of DPMP in the ndr1-1, pad4-1, sid2-2, npr1-3 and wrky70-3 Arabidopsis defense mutants as well as the transgenic nahG line. While the ndr1, sid2 and pad4 mutant plants are known to be compromised in defense-associated SA biosynthesis and the transgenic nahG line does not accumulate significant levels of this defense hormone14, npr1 mutants are deficient in the perception of SA33343536. WRKY70 is a transcription factor that partially operates in defense signaling downstream from NPR1 and is partially NPR1-independent30373839. Col-0 and mutants plants were treated with HpaNoco2 24h after single foliar-spray applications with 10muM DPMP. Hpa spores were counted 7 dpi. DPMP induced strong resistance against Hpa in Col-0 wild type plants and the sid2-2, pad4-1 and ndr1 mutants (Fig. 4a). DPMP-mediated immunity was slightly, but significantly reduced in the wrky70 mutant compared to Col-0 (Fig. 4b). However, in npr1-3 plants the defense inducing activity of DPMP was fully abolished; similar to that of INA (Fig. 4c). Our lab previously reported that DCA is partially dependent on NPR1 and WRKY7030. DPMP is weakly dependent on WRKY70 and completely dependent on NPR1, which discriminates this compound from DCA. Surprisingly, in nahG transgenic plants, no significant protection was observed against Hpa after the application of DPMP (Fig. 4a). The nahG transgenic plants express a SA hydroxylase, an enzyme that converts SA to catechol. It is possible that this enzyme is also converting DPMP or one of its bioactive metabolic products.. . . Structure activity analysis of a selection of PMP-related derivatives. DPMP is only one member of a set of 33 PMPs or -related compounds identified by our high throughput synthetic elicitor screen. While not all of these 33 compounds share a common phenyl-imino-methyl-phenol skeleton, they all bear an imine group linked to a phenyl moiety. We tested ten compounds of this set of 33 that were commercially available and compared their defense-inducing activities to DPMP (Fig. 5a,b). Arabidopsis Col-0 plants were pretreated with a concentration of 10muM or 25muM of the respective chemicals 24h prior to HpaNoco2 infection. We observed three major activity trends of these compounds: strong, moderate or weak compared to DPMP, which we considered a strong defense inducer. PMP-related compounds that induced significant levels of immunity against Hpa at 10muM and 25muM were categorized as strong. If they only induced significant protection against Hpa at 25muM, we categorized them as moderate. If they did not exhibit any significant defense induction at the tested concentrations, we classified them as weak inducers, as they were still able to induce CaBP22-333::GUS expression in our initial compound screen (data not shown).. 4-[[(3,5-dichloro-2-hydroxyphenyl)methylene]amino] benzenesulfonamide (CMP974) and 4-tert-butyl-2-[(5-chloro-2-hydroxybenzylidene)amino]phenol (CMP993), provided strong protection against Hpa infection. CMP974 and CMP993 suppressed Hpa spore growth at concentrations of both 10muM and 25muM and levels of protection mediated by them reached up to 80% and 50%, respectively.. Benzoic acid, 3-fluoro-2-[(5-chloro-2-hydroxyphenyl)methylene]hydrazide (CMP508), N-benzylidene-2-hydroxybenzohydrazide (CMP318), Benzenamine, N-[(5-bromo-2-thienyl)methylene]-2-methyl-3-nitro-[N(E)]- (CMP686) mediated moderate levels of defense induction and reduced susceptibility only at the 25muM concentration to 75% to 50%. Although the five remaining PMP-related compounds did not trigger defense induction at concentrations of 10muM or 25muM, and are considered weak inducers, they may induce plant defense at higher concentrations. The strongest compounds of the 10 tested candidates are true PMPs structurally similar to DPMP, while the class of moderate defense inducers also includes CMP318 and CMP686, compounds that deviate from the PMP core structure.. . . Synthetic elicitor activity of possible metabolic products of DPMP. The imine bond of PMPs may be subject to hydrolysis in the aqueous environment of biological tissues and cells40. Members of the imine bond containing compound class imprimatin C1 are known to remain stable in aqueous solution before application to plants and the synthetic auxin sirtinol, which also contains an imine bond, is hydrolyzed after uptake into cells4142.. We tested whether the molecular structure of DPMP dissociates in aqueous solution in vitro. NMR analysis combined with HSQC (Heteronuclear Single Quantum Coherence) showed that DPMP is not hydrolyzed in aqueous medium in vitro (data not shown). However, upon uptake by plant tissues, DPMP may get hydrolyzed and further converted by plant enzymes and the resulting products may be the actual biologically active compounds in vivo.. Therefore we tested 3,5-dichlorosalicylaldehyde (3,5-DCSAL) and m-anisidine (Fig. 6f). While m-anisidine should get released upon hydrolysis of DPMP, the production of 3,5-DCSAL should require an additional oxidation step. We first tested the ability of 3,5-DCSAL and m-anisidine to induce GUS expression in transgenic CaBP22-333::GUS Arabidopsis plants (Fig. 6a). 3,5-DCSAL induced expression of this pathogen-responsive reporter gene at the same concentration as DPMP (1-10muM). At higher concentrations of 3,5-DCSAL (50muM to 500muM), the observed decline of GUS activity may be cause by 3,5-DCSAL -mediated phytotoxicity.. Surprisingly, m-anisidine also induced GUS expression in this plant line, albeit at much higher concentrations (50-500muM). To confirm these results, we tested different concentrations of 3,5-DCSAL and m-anisidine in Hpa defense assays and compared their bioactivity to DPMP. At a concentration of 10muM, 3,5-DCSAL exhibits a similar strength of defense activation as 10muM DPMP against Hpa (Fig. 6b). M-anisidine does not trigger defense induction at a concentration of 100muM (data not shown). However, at higher concentrations (400muM and 600muM) m-anisidine triggers immunity against Hpa and, like DPMP, its defense-inducing activity is completely dependent on NPR1 (Fig. 6c). Much lower concentrations of m-anisidine were sufficient for the CaBP22-333::GUS expression studies shown in Fig. 6a than that for the Hpa defense assays shown in Fig. 6c. This difference is due to the nature of the respective assays. While the reporter gene assays were done under continuous exposure to the compound for 24 h, the synthetic elicitors were only applied once by single spray application in the Hpa assays. In addition to protection against Hpa, m-anisidine induced plant immunity against Pst (Fig. 6d). In order to test whether the imine bridge of PMPs itself is sufficient to induce immunity against HpaNoco2, we analyzed N-[(E)-2-Thienylmethylidene]-2-Propanamine (CMP500) (Fig. 6f), a molecule of relative simple structure that contains an imine bridge. CMP500 did not induce detectable resistance of Arabidopsis Col-0 against HpaNoco2 at the concentration we tested (Fig. 6e). Taken together these results show that, the PMP imine bridge structure itself seems not to trigger immunity. However, two possible metabolic products of DPMP have synthetic elicitor activity. As 3,5-DCSAL is of similar efficiency as DPMP, this potential metabolic product of DPMP may be mainly responsible for the observed immunity after DPMP application. Although we cannot exclude, that in plant tissues 3,5-DCSAL gets further oxidized to 3,5 Dichlorosalicylic acid, this aldehyde proved to be a powerful synthetic elicitor.. . . Transcriptome changes triggered by DPMP in Arabidopsis shoots and roots. To profile global transcriptional patterns associated with DPMP-mediated defense activation in Arabidopsis roots and shoots separately, we performed mRNA-seq analysis. In soil grown plants, separating these plant parts from each other without any contamination by dirt or excessive wounding is difficult. Therefore Arabidopsis plants were grown for 14 days on  MS agar plates containing either 3muM DPMP or mock solution (solvent only) and their shoot and root tissues were analyzed separately. This condition was chosen because continuous exposure to 3muM DPMP triggers strong GUS expression in CaBP22-333::GUS plants (see Supplementary Fig. S1). We performed two independent biological replicates and sequenced the respective libraries using the Illumina HiSeq2500 platform. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) after DPMP treatment were identified by comparing read counts to those observed in the respective mock-treated control samples using a Bonferroni-corrected false discovery rate (FDR)-cut off of 0.05.. In shoots, treatment with DPMP significantly altered transcript levels of 1364 genes, 1061 of which were transcriptionally up-regulated (DPMP-shoots-up) and 303 were transcriptionally down-regulated (DPMP-shoots-down) relative to the mock controls (see Supplementary Table S1). DPMP treatment in shoot tissue resulted in a typical defense-associated transcriptional profile. Standard defense marker genes, such as PR1, PR5, CaBP22 and LURP1, as well as numerous WRKY transcription factor genes were transcriptionally up-regulated. Enriched gene ontology (GO) terms were calculated by the Botany Array Resource classification super viewer [ http://bar.utoronto.ca/welcome.htm;43] and suggested that collective roles of DPMP-shoots-up genes are in response to stress and abiotic/biotic stimuli as well as signal transduction (Table 1). Furthermore, the analysis of promoter motifs of these genes using the TAIR motif analysis tool (https://www.arabidopsis.org/tools/bulk/motiffinder/index.jsp) revealed that these DPMP-shoots-up genes are highly enriched for known defense-associated promoter motifs such as the hexameric motif TTGACT (p=2.92E-38) that matches the WRKY-binding W box element (TTGACC/T)44. Also, a TGA box core motif (TGACG) was represented in the significantly enriched hexamer TTGACG (p=2.41E-05). Interestingly, DPMP-shoot-down genes feature, along with response to stress and abiotic/biotic stimuli, the additional enriched GO term electron transport or energy pathways, which also includes genes involved in photosynthesis (see Supplementary Table S1). Defense responses are associated with increased demands for energy and plant respiration is highly stimulated during plant defense responses45. In contrast, studies on photosynthesis and plant defense have shown that photosynthetic metabolism is repressed locally during plant defense454647. It has been suggested that this might be due the high sensitivity of the photosynthetic apparatus for ROIs produced during the defense-associated oxidative burst45.. Comparison of sets of genes that were induced by pathogens or known elicitors revealed that 63% of all DPMP-shoots-up gene members are also inducible by the SA analogs DCA, INA and/or BTH3048. This may indicate that, like DCA, INA and BTH, DPMP also acts as a partial agonist of SA and mimics some SA functions (Fig. 7a). Additionally, 62% of all DPMP-shoots-up gene members are also responsive to infections with the oomycete Hpa, the bacterium P. syringae and/or the powdery mildew fungus Erysiphae orontii (Fig. 7b). Transcriptional responses triggered by these virulent pathogens are associated with basal defense495051.. We previously described the ACID (Associated with Chemically Induced Defense) cluster as a set of genes strictly associated with defense activation by two separate synthetic elicitors, DCA and INA30. Comparison of this cluster with the set of high dose (hd)-BHTC-shoots-up genes, we recently described31, and the set of DPMP-shoots-up defined a set of 75 genes that are commonly up-regulated by four distinct synthetic elicitors (DCA, INA, BHTC and DPMP). We termed this set SUPER-ACIDs (see Supplementary Fig. S4 and Supplementary Table S1), as its members are particularly tightly associated with chemically induced disease resistance. Enriched gene ontology (GO) terms43 suggested that collective roles of SUPER-ACIDs are in response to stress and abiotic/biotic stimuli as well as signal transduction (Table 1). Also the SUPER-ACID cluster contains many known defense-related genes and is highly enriched for genes associated with kinase activity (p=2.808e-08) and the cellular components of plasma membrane (p=5.920e-05), extracellular (p=8.781e-03) and nucleus (p=0.044). Furthermore, the analysis of promoter motifs of this cluster using the TAIR motif analysis tool revealed that these SUPER-ACIDs are highly enriched for known defense-associated promoter motifs such as the hexameric motif TTGACT (p=9.37e-151) that matches the WRKY-binding W box element (TTGACC/T)44. Also, a TGA box core motif (TGACG) was represented in the significantly enriched hexamer TTGACG (p=297e-80). Additionally, almost all (97%) SUPER-ACID members are also responsive to infections with Hpa, Pstand/or E. orontii (see Supplementary Fig. S5). All of these results support the conclusion that SUPER-ACIDs are important for disease resistance, and tightly associated with successful pathogen defense.. In roots, the number of DPMP-responsive DEGs was lower (558 DEGs), with 207 up-regulated (DPMP-roots-up) and 351 down-regulated genes (DPMP-roots-down) (see Supplementary Table S1 & Supplementary Fig. S3). However, the set of DPMP-roots-up genes shares similar putative collective roles with DPMP-shoots-up members. As in the case of DPMP-treated shoots, enriched gene ontology (GO) terms showed that this set also contains genes with likely collective roles in response to stress and abiotic/biotic stimuli as well as signal transduction (Table 1). Moreover, this set also contains established defense marker genes like PR2, LURP1, CaBP22 and WRKY genes. Genes down-regulated by DPMP treatment in root tissues further contain genes related to response to stress and abiotic/biotic stimuli. These results indicate that the role of DPMP-root members is also likely related to defense responses.. . . DPMP induces hormesis-like responses similar to BHTC in Arabidopsis. Interestingly, similar to the synthetic elicitor BHTC, DPMP significantly enhanced root length of plate-grown Arabidopsis plants at concentrations below 1muM, while high doses of DPMP reduced Arabidopsis root growth. In these assays, plants were grown on various concentrations of DPMP-containing 1/2 MS agar plates for 14 days. At concentrations 0.01muM and 0.1muM DPMP significantly enhanced the root length of Arabidopsis plants, while at concentrations above 1muM inhibition of root growth was observed (Fig. 8). The reduction of root growth on 10muM DPMP may be due to phytotoxic effects of this compound or due to re-allocation of metabolic resources away from growth-related processes to defense induction. Our data shown in Supplementary Fig. S1 suggest that DPMP at this concentration is not toxic to Arabidopsis. Interestingly, growth penalty effects are commonly observed when plant immunity is constantly induced due to mutations5253. Thus, most likely DPMP causes at high doses reallocation of critical resources to defense reactions. This can be clearly seen by the massive induction of defense gene expression..
