Results. . Mutants Affected in H2A.Z Incorporation Have Diverse Developmental and Immunity Phenotypes. To study the role of H2A.Z in plant defense processes, we analyzed mutants defective in SWR1 complex components PIE1, ARP6, and SWC6, as well as those depleted of the histone variant H2A.Z. Consistent with previous studies, pie1-2 (Noh and Amasino, 2003), arp6-1 (Deal etal., 2005), and swc6-1 (Lzaro etal., 2008) mutants showed pleiotropic growth and developmental phenotypes including early flowering, elongated petioles, and reduced fertility when grown in long photoperiod (LD) (Figure1B). The pie1 mutant showed the most severe growth defects and even though it displayed accelerated reproductive transition, bolting was delayed. The arp6 and swc6 mutants phenocopied each other with characteristic early flowering and serrated leaves. This was consistent with the biochemical interaction of ARP6 and SWC6 in yeast, where their existence in the complex is mutually dependent (Mizuguchi etal., 2004). The hta9-1 hta11-1 double mutant (loss of two major H2A.Z encoding genes out of the possible three in Arabidopsis) phenocopied arp6 and swc6 mutants with early flowering and serrated leaves. The severe growth defects in the pie1 mutant have been previously attributed to the de-repression of immune responses characterized by spontaneous cell death and upregulation of defense genes (March-Daz etal., 2008). Growth in short photoperiods (SD) largely suppressed some of the growth defects of the pie1 mutant, even though the rosette size remained significantly smaller compared with the other SWR1c mutants (Figure1B). All the studies reported here, unless otherwise specified, were performed on plants grown under SD.. SWR1c components have been proposed to be negative regulators of plant immunity with pie1, swc6, and hta9 hta11 mutants reported to display spontaneous cell death and enhanced resistance to virulent bacterial pathogens (March-Daz etal., 2008). The role of ARP6 in this process is still not known and has been expected to be similar to PIE1, SWC6, and H2A.Z. In order to investigate this, we characterized the defense responses of these mutants. In our experimental conditions, trypan blue staining revealed no apparent spontaneous cell death in the mutants (Figure1C). We occasionally observed patches of cell death and leaf torsion in some leaves of the pie1 mutant (Supplemental Figure1). To investigate their immunity phenotypes further, we challenged 4-week-old mutants with the hemibiotrophic bacterial pathogen P.syringae pv tomato DC3000 (Pst DC3000) by spray inoculation and monitored bacterial growth. We found that pie1, swc6, and hta9 hta11 mutants showed more macroscopic disease symptoms and increased susceptibility towardPst DC3000 compared with the wild-type Col-0. However, the arp6 mutant showed increased resistance (Figure1D and 1E). Overall, pie1, swc6, and hta9 hta11 mutants accommodated 10 to 15 times more bacterial titers at 3days post inoculation (dpi) than the wild type. The pie1, swc6, and hta9 hta11 mutants displayed severely compromised resistance similar to that of the enhanced disease susceptibility1 (eds1-2) mutant, which was used as a susceptible control (Feys etal., 2001). There were no differences in the bacterial titers at day 0 (2h post inoculation) between the different mutants and the wild-type Col-0 plants. A transgenic SWC6 complemented line showed wild-type resistance to Pst DC3000 (Supplemental Figure2), suggesting that the resistance phenotype we observe is caused by the mutation. Our observations suggest that H2A.Z, PIE1, and SWC6 are essential for basal resistance in Arabidopsis, whereas ARP6 has an opposite function.. These results were intriguing as a previous study has shown that pie1, swc6, and hta9 hta11 mutants displayed rather constitutive defense activation marked by spontaneous lesions and disease-resistance phenotypes (March-Daz etal., 2008). As mentioned earlier, the pie1 mutant showed severe growth defects when grown under LD. These phenotypes were partially suppressed by growth under SD (Figure1B). In order to investigate whether the severe growth defects in pie1 under LD were due to constitutive defense activation and therefore to test if pie1 shows photoperiod-dependent defense phenotypes, we assessed its resistance to Pst DC3000 in these growth conditions. To bypass early flowering induction by constant growth under LD photoperiods, the mutants along with the wild type were pre-grown for two weeks under SD conditions before being shifted to LD for another two weeks prior to infection. Consistent with the results from the SD experiments, pie1 remained increasingly susceptible to Pst DC3000 (Supplemental Figure3A). Moreover, it showed no spontaneous cell death in the leaves under these conditions, similarly to the other mutants (Supplemental Figure3B), except for the patches of dead tissue observed as in SD. These results suggest that the growth defects in the pie1 mutant are not necessarily a consequence of enhanced defense activation. The defense phenotypes of arp6, swc6, and hta9 hta11 grown in LD were also similar to the results obtained under SD conditions (Supplemental Figure3A) further confirming that the immunity phenotypes we observed are not due to specific growth conditions, especially the photoperiod. These results also confirm that the contrasting defense phenotypes observed in this study and by March-Daz etal. (2008) are unlikely to be caused by growth conditions such as the photoperiod.. . . Resistance to Avirulent Pathogens Is Compromised inpie1 and swc6. During interaction with avirulent pathogens, recognition of effectors by the receptor proteins in the host plant leads to the activation of ETI. In Arabidopsis, the bacterial effectors AvrRps4 and AvrRpt2 trigger resistance through recognition by the toll interleukin-1 receptor (TIR)-type and the coiled coil (CC)-type nucleotide binding-leucine-rich-repeat (NB-LRR) proteins RPS4/RRS1 and RPS2, respectively (Kunkel etal., 1993, Gassmann etal., 1999, Narusaka etal., 2009). To examine the possible roles of SWR1c and H2A.Z in ETI, we inoculated the corresponding mutants with avirulent Pst DC3000 expressing either AvrRps4 or AvrRpt2 effectors. The pie1 and swc6 mutants are more susceptible compared with wild-type in both interactions (Figure2A and 2B). They were, however, not as hypersusceptible as eds1 or ndr1 (non-race-specific disease resistance1), used as susceptible controls in response to AvrRps4 and AvRrpt2 (Century etal., 1995), respectively. Consistent with the earlier results, arp6 displayed full resistance like wild-type plants, suggesting that arp6 mutation does not alter RPS4- and RPS2-mediated resistance. The hta9 hta11 double mutant showed mild but not significant susceptibility compared with wild-type. In Arabidopsis, H2A.Z is encoded by three genes HTA9, HTA11, and HTA8. The presence of HTA8, even though generally lowly expressed (Supplemental Figure4), in the hta9 hta11 double mutant could compensate for the lack of HTA9 and HTA11. These results suggest that PIE1 and SWC6 have a positive function in ETI. Interestingly, ARP6 function appears to be dispensable.. To understand the basis of the failure to mount ETI, we examined the level of salicylic acid (SA) accumulation, an important defense hormone in response to biotrophic pathogens and particularly during ETI (Robert-Seilaniantz etal., 2011). The basal level of SA did not noticeably differ between the the wild type and the mutants except for arp6, where it was higher (Figure2C). Interestingly, 24h after infiltration with Pst DC3000 AvrRps4, allthe mutants showed increased SA accumulation in comparison with Col-0. Accumulation of SA in pie1, swc6, and hta9 hta11 was 2-fold higher relative to Col-0, and reached 3-fold in arp6. Our results show that in spite of SA accumulation, resistance to virulent and avirulent P.syringae is impaired in pie1 and swc6 mutants, suggesting that SWR1c activity (especially PIE1, SWC6) and H2A.Z are required for SA-dependent downstream signaling processes. These results are further supportive to the resistance phenotypes of the mutants to virulent Pst DC3000 (Figure1D and 1E).. . . Role of SWR1c Components in Resistance to Necrotrophic Pathogen. Signaling crosstalks and antagonistic interactions between different defense pathways regulated by hormones have been extensively studied (Robert-Seilaniantz etal., 2011, Thaler etal., 2012). SA-mediated defense is activated during interaction with biotrophic pathogens while jasmonic acid (JA)-mediated defense is active against necrotrophs and herbivores (Glazebrook, 2005, Howe and Jander, 2008). As presented earlier, pie1, swc6, and hta9 hta11 mutant plants showed impaired SA-mediated defense responses even though they accumulated a high level of the SA hormone in response to Pseudomonas infection. In order to investigate whether these mutants are affected in the SA/JA crosstalk, we investigated their resistance to the necrotrophic pathogen Botrytis cineria. Leaves of the wild-type and mutant plants were drop inoculated with spore suspension, and the growth of lesions was monitored. Average lesion size measured 3 dpi was significantly bigger in pie1, swc6, and hta9 hat11. The proportions of outgrowing lesion type IV (lesion over 6 mm in diameter) in pie1, swc6, and hta9 hat11 were higher compared with arp6 mutant plants that showed mild resistance (Figure3 and Supplemental Figure5). These results show that perturbation of H2A.Z incorporation results in a compromised JA/ethylene (ET)-mediated immunity. It also suggests that components of SWR1c do not play the same function in this defense pathway, as arp6 showed wild-type resistance to Botrytis, as opposed to the rest of the mutants.. . . SWR1c Components Have Distinct Functions in Gene Regulation. In order to elucidate the molecular basis of the phenotypes described above, and to dissect the role of H2A.Z and SWR1c subunits in gene regulation, we carried out a global transcriptome analysis of the wild-type and mutant lines using RNA-seq. Three replicates of total RNA from 2-week-old seedlings from each mutant were sequenced. Genes showing at least 2-fold change from the wild type with a P value cut-off of 0.05 were used for further analyses. We found that mutations in SWR1c components result in misregulation of a large number of genes (Figure4A and 4B and Supplemental Dataset 1). The pie1 mutation resulted in the largest number of gene misregulation, with 2295 genes upregulated and 1051 genes downregulated. This was expected, as PIE1 is the catalytic subunit of the SWR1 complex. The genes misregulated in our study showed statistically significant (hypergeometric test) overlap with the previously published data (March-Daz etal., 2008, Coleman-Derr and Zilberman, 2012).. We found a total of 671 genes to be commonly misregulated among all four mutants (473 genes upregulated and 198 genes downregulated). This accounts for 20% of the genes misregulated in pie1, and 22%, 32%, and 27% in arp6, swc6, and hta9 hta11, respectively. Moreover, the commonly misregulated genes (up and down) showed a statistically significant overlap with H2A.Z enrichment in the genebodies (Coleman-Derr and Zilberman, 2012). We found that 1262 genes were uniquely upregulated in pie1 accounting for 55% of the total number of genes upregulated in this mutant. In arp6, swc6, and hta9 hta11, however, only 20%, 4%, and 13%, respectively, wereuniquely upregulated. Similarly 50% of the genes downregulated in pie1 were unique. The proportions of uniquely downregulated genes were 25% in arp6, 4.5% in swc6, and 18% in hta9 hta11. The large proportion of uniquely misregulated genes in pie1 suggests a potential SWR1c/H2A.Z independent role for PIE1 in gene regulation.. To explore this further and to elucidate the relationship between individual mutants, we performed principal component analysis (PCA) of the RNA-seq data. The first three principal components (PC1, PC2, and PC3) together accounted for 92.1% of the variance in the data (44.44%, 30.55%, and 17.11%, respectively) (Figure4C). It also revealed that the four mutant genotypes segregate into three distinct groups: swc6 and hta9 hta11mutants co-segregated while pie1 and arp6 mutants weredistinct. The second principal component (PC2) distinguished the mutants from the wild type. PC1 clearly separated pie1 from the rest of the group, whereas PC3 defined the contribution of arp6 (Figure4C and Supplemental Figure6). This analysis has further strengthened the possibility of non-overlapping functions for the complex components. In line withthe PCA analysis, differential gene expression analyses showed a poor correlation of gene misregulation caused by arp6 and pie1 mutations (r2= 0.16) (Figure4D), as well as between hta9 hta11 and pie1 (r2=0.11) (Figure4E), which is surprising as pie1 mutation is expected to phenocopy H2A.Z depletion to a large extent. The arp6 and swc6 mutants in Arabidopsis have similar morphological and developmental phenotypes, especially early flowering and serrated leaves. Moreover, ARP6 and SWC6 have been shown to physically interact in Arabidopsis (March-Diaz etal., 2007, Lzaro etal., 2008). Intriguingly, in our RNA-seq data, the transcriptional changes due to these mutations did not show a strong correlation (r2= 0.42) (Figure4F). This observation is consistent with the defense phenotypes described above, suggesting that ARP6 and SWC6 could have distinct functions in Arabidopsis. In agreement with the PCA analysis, swc6 and hta9 hta11 double mutants displayed a strong correlation of transcriptional misregulation (r2= 0.75), indicating overlapping roles for SWC6 and H2A.Z in gene regulation (Figure4G). This is in contrast to arp6, which showed only a modest correlation (r2= 0.38) with hta9 hta11 (Supplemental Figure7).. To understand the function of SWR1c and H2A.Z in gene regulation, particularly in immunity, we performed a Gene Ontology (GO) analysis of the mutant transcriptomes. We found a significant over-representationof SA response (P= 4.46 10-6) and defense (P= 7.75 10-3) related GO terms in the 473 genes commonly misregulated in the mutants (Supplemental Dataset2). This is in accordance with what was reported earlier (March-Daz etal., 2008). The commonly downregulated genes where enriched in triterpene (thalianol, P= 1.77 10-4 and tricyclic triterpenoid metabolic process, P= 7.04 10-4) related GO terms. In addition, pie1 showed a significant over-representation of several biological processes including auxin metabolic processes, membrane organization, and response to heat, indicating the important role of PIE1 in gene expression in general. In swc6 and hta9 hta11, the GO term response to heat was significantly enriched, which is consistent with H2A.Z function in response to temperature (Kumar and Wigge, 2010). We also observed that swc6 and hta9 hta11 mutants display an enrichment of hydrogen peroxide-related GO terms like in arp6 (Supplemental Dataset 2). Taken together, the results of the transcriptome analysis demonstrate that the components of the SWR1c have distinct roles in the regulation of gene expression in Arabidopsis.. . . PIE1 Functions to Coordinate Distinct Defense Signaling Pathways. Our RNA-seq analysis revealed that, in the SWR1c mutants, particularly pie1, genes required for disease resistance were misregulated as previously shown (March-Daz etal., 2008). Genes involved in systemic acquired resistance such as PR1, PR5, EDS5, and NIMIN1 were highly upregulated in pie1 (Figure5A-5D and Supplemental Dataset 1). The arp6 mutant showed modest upregulation of all the above genes except for EDS5. Only PR5 among these genes was upregulated in swc6 and hta9 hta11, but not to the same extent as in pie1. Interestingly, the pie1 mutant shows severely compromised resistance in spite of the enhanced expression of defense genes (as shown above). To further understand the molecular basis for this paradox, we analyzed the transcriptome further. We observed that genes encoding the WRKY family of transcription factors are upregulated in pie1 (Figure5E and Supplemental Dataset). WRKY transcription factors are important regulatory components during plant response to pathogen infection and abiotic stresses. Moreover, they have been implicated in plant immunity as both positive and negative regulators (Pandey and Somssich, 2009, Rushton etal., 2010). WRKY38 and WRKY62, in particular, are highly expressed in the pie1 background (Figure5F and 5G). These two WRKY proteins were shown to be negative regulators of resistance to pathogens. In line with these observations, the uniquely upregulated genes in pie1 are also enriched in GO terms related to negative regulation of the defense response (P= 1.02 10-9).. The pie1 mutant displays upregulation of SA-responsive geneexpression. SA is a key regulator of signaling networks involved in defense along with other hormones such as JA(Robert-Seilaniantz etal., 2011). SA- and JA-mediated defenseresponses are triggered in the plant depending on the nature of the pathogen (Van der Does etal., 2013). These two pathways act antagonistically to modulate defense responses. Activation of one pathway usually correlates with attenuation of the other (Thaler etal., 2012). Consistent with this, we found that the SA-inducible glutaredoxin gene GRX480, which has been proposed to antagonize the JA-responsive transcription of PDF1.2 is nearly 10-fold upregulated in pie1 (Figure6A). Transgenic plants ectopically expressing GRX480 displayed reduced JA-induced gene expression (Ndamukong etal., 2007). Surprisingly, JA-mediated responses were not suppressed in pie1. In fact, uniquely upregulated genes in pie1areenriched in GO terms related to the JA metabolic process (P= 9.12 10-32) and JA-mediated signaling pathway (P= 5.17 10-23). For instance, genes involved in JA biosynthesis (Figure6B-6D), signaling (Figure6E and 6F), and response (Figure6G-6I) were upregulated. We further analyzed the expression of JA-induced genes (Nemhauser etal., 2006) in our data and found that these are upregulated in pie1 compared with the other mutants (Figure6J), confirming that JA-responsive pathways are derepressed in spite of the SAR genes being upregulated. These observations, together with the upregulation of negative regulators of defense (e.g., WRKYs), could explain the unexpected disease susceptibility phenotypes we observe. They also point to a potential role that PIE1 plays in coordinating distinct defense signaling pathways, especially in the SA-JA antagonism.. . . SWC6 Is Epistatic to ARP6. Our analyses revealed that mutants of the SWR1c components show considerable differences in physiological and molecular phenotypes, leading to the assumption that the complex components may be functionally specialized. It is also likely that the non-enzymatic subunits might not necessarily be essential for complex function, and their depletion or inclusion in the complex could modulate its function. The components could also have functions independent of H2A.Z incorporation. To further elucidate the possible specialization and to understand their role in relation to each other, we analyzed double mutant plants. Since arp6 and swc6 mutants show similar morphological and developmental phenotypes but contrasting immunity traits, we analyzed arp6 swc6 double mutants to study disease resistance without the confounding effects of contrasting developmental phenotypes. The double mutants did not show any noticeable additional morphological phenotypes than the single mutants suggesting overlapping functions in development. As shown above, arp6 showed resistance to DC3000 while the swc6 mutant showed increased susceptibility compared with wild-type Col-0. Interestingly, the arp6 swc6 double mutants displayed increased susceptibility to Pst DC3000 phenocopying swc6(Figure 7). These results indicate that SWC6 is epistatic to ARP6 in disease-resistance traits. Despite the overlapping functions in development, it seems thatloss of SWC6 significantly compromises the regulation of immunity genes by SWR1c more than the loss of ARP6.. . . SWR1c Mutants Show Compromised Defense Gene Induction in Response to Pseudomonas. Our gene expression analyses have shown that genes involved in systemic acquired resistance such as PR1 and PR5 were derepressed in the SWR1c mutants and therefore showed increased basal expression (Figure5). Interestingly, however, pie1, swc6, and hta9 hta11 mutants were severely compromised in resistance to both virulent and avirulent P.syringae strains in spite of the enhanced basal expression of defense genes. To understand the molecular basis for these paradoxical phenotypes, we analyzed defense gene expression in the mutants in response to Pst DC3000. Gene expression was analyzed in 4-week-old wild-type Col-0 and the mutants by quantitative RT-PCR 6 h post inoculation with Pst DC3000 or mock treatment (10mM MgCl2) (Figure8). As expected, PR1 showed very low basal expression in Col-0 under control conditions, whereas bacterial infection resulted in a strong induction of gene expression (Figure8A). The arp6 mutant showed derepression of PR1and a stronger induction in response to Pst DC3000. On the other hand, the pie1 mutant showed a strong constitutive expression of PR1; however, inoculation with Pst DC3000 inoculation resulted in strong downregulation (Figure8A). In swc6 and hta9 hta11, where basal expression of PR1 was modestly altered, DC3000 infection resulted in its repression (Figure8A). Similarly, analysis of PR5 expression showed that while it was strongly induced in arp6 in response to Pst DC3000, there was little or no induction in pie1, swc6, and hta9 hta11 mutants (Figure8B). These results show that induction of PR1 and PR5 was compromised upon pathogen inoculation in pie1, swc6, and hta9 hta11 mutants despite the higher basal expression. Together, these results show that while it is required to maintain defense genes in repressed state in the absence of pathogen signals, SWR1c function, and therefore H2A.Z are essential for strong pathogen-induced defense gene activation that is essential for disease resistance..
