Results. . Mild salt stress inhibits primary and lateral root elongation and stimulates LR proliferation. To examine how salt stress affects Arabidopsis LR proliferation, the dose response of Arabidopsis seedlings to increasing salt concentration was tested. Seedlings were germinated and grown on vertical nutrient agar plates until the root was 2 cm long (4-5 d) and then transferred to fresh plates with increasing levels of NaCl. At the time of transfer no LRs were visible. Figure 1 shows that increasing NaCl levels up to 50 mM stimulated the production of LRs, where seedlings exhibited virtually twice the number of first order LRs (emerged LRs) after 21 d than the control (0 mM NaCl) and also produced a few second order LRs (data not shown). However, the transfer of seedlings to 100 mM salt stress caused almost complete inhibition of LR development. These results suggest an acclimation response of LR development to mild levels of salt stress.. . Fig. 1.. . Effect of NaCl concentration on Arabidopsis lateral root number. Seedlings grown on 1 mM KNO3 medium for 4-5 d were transferred to the same medium plus the indicated concentrations of NaCl for 21 d. Data are mean emerged LRs SE (n=30). Bars with different letters indicate significant difference at P 0.05 (Fisher's protected LSD test). The data are representative of similar results in three independent experiments.. . . . To investigate the stimulatory effect of mild salt stress on LR development further, 4-5 d-old seedlings were transferred to vertical segmented nutrient agar plates with or without 50 mM NaCl (the NaCl concentration that had displayed the greatest stimulatory effect) in all the segments. It was observed that first order LR number increased significantly in the top and middle segments of the plate compared with unstressed plants (Fig. 2A). Salt stress caused an even greater stimulation of second order LR proliferation where stressed seedlings produced 8-fold more LRs than unstressed seedlings (Fig. 2B). Furthermore, only stressed plants developed third order LRs (Fig. 2C). By contrast with its stimulatory effect on LR number, salt stress led to a reduction in average LR length (Fig. 2D) with stressed LRs exhibiting approximately half the length of unstressed LRs. Moreover, although salt stress led to an increase in LR number, an evaluation of total LR length (a function of both total LR number and average LR length) suggested that the salt-mediated increase in LR number could not fully compensate for the reduction in the average LR length (Fig. 2E). Primary root elongation was severely reduced in stressed seedlings, which displayed a 4-fold reduction in primary root length compared with unstressed seedlings (Fig. 2F). Indeed, only unstressed primary roots reached the bottom segment of the plate, hence the absence of any first order stressed LRs in the bottom segment (Fig. 2A). Overall, our results suggest that mild salt stress stimulates an SIMR phenotype in contrast to severe salt stress where LR proliferation is inhibited.. . Fig. 2.. . Salt stress causes an SIMR phenotype. (A-F) Seedlings grown on 1 mM KNO3 medium for 4-5 d were transferred to the same medium 50 mM NaCl for 21 d. Data are mean SE (n=20). * Significant difference (P 0.05) between unstressed and stressed roots (Fisher's protected LSD test). The data are representative of similar results in three independent experiments. Top, Middle, Bottom: the different segments of the segmented agar plate.. . . . . . Stimulation of LR proliferation by salt stress is enhanced upon transfer from low to high NO3-. The stimulatory effect of nitrate-enriched media on LR proliferation has been well documented (reviewed in Zhang et al., 2007). In Arabidopsis, the transfer from NO3--poor to NO3--rich medium predominantly stimulates LR elongation (Zhang et al., 1999; Linkohr et al., 2002). It was therefore tested whether transfer from low NO3- to NO3--rich medium would have a stimulatory effect on the LR component of the salt SIMR, by transferring seedlings grown on 10 muM KNO3 to plates containing 1 mM KNO3 with and without NaCl uniformly present across all plate segments. The enrichment of the NO3- supply led to a dramatic enhancement of the salt-induced increase in LR number. While first order LRs were induced to a similar extent as with salt alone (compare Figs. 2A and 3A) the mean number of second and third order LRs (16 and 8, respectively) exhibited a striking enhancement compared to salt stress alone (6.5 and 1.5, respectively) (compare Figs. 2B and 3B; 2C and 3C). On the other hand, when combined with salt treatment, the enrichment of the NO3- supply had no stimulatory effect on LR elongation (Fig. 3D); mean LR length was reduced to a similar degree as with salt stress alone (compare Figs. 2D and 3D). Strikingly, evaluation of total LR length showed that NO3- enhancement of the salt stress-induced increase in LR number fully compensated for the decreased average LR length (Fig. 3E). Primary root elongation was again severely inhibited in salt-stressed roots (Fig. 3F).. . Fig. 3.. . The LR proliferation component of the salt SIMR is enhanced by transfer from low to high NO3-. (A-F) Seedlings grown on 10 muM KNO3 medium for 4-5 d were transferred to 1 mM KNO3 medium 50 mM NaCl for 21 d. Data are mean SE (n=20). * Significant difference (P 0.05) between unstressed and stressed roots (Fisher's protected LSD test). The data are representative of similar results in three independent experiments. Top, Middle, Bottom: the different segments of the segmented agar plate.. . . . Salt stress comprises two stress components, namely osmotic stress and ionic stress. To determine whether the salt SIMR is specific to salt stress and not to osmotic stress alone, the effect of the latter on root architecture was tested. When seedlings were transferred from 10 muM KNO3 to 1 mM KNO3 supplemented with 100 mM mannitol, primary root elongation was only minimally affected by osmotic stress (compare Figs. 3F and 4E). Furthermore, instead of a stimulation of LR proliferation, a reduction in first order LR number was observed in stressed roots compared with unstressed roots (Fig. 4A). Moreover, second order LRs only appeared in unstressed roots (Fig. 4B) while no third order LRs were observed in either unstressed or stressed roots. The average LR length was reduced by osmotic stress in a similar manner to salt stress (Fig. 4C) and this reduction in average LR length combined with the decreased LR number led to a large fall in total LR length (Fig. 4D). Similar results were obtained when seedlings were transferred to mannitol but without the stimulatory effect of NO3--enrichment (transfer of seedlings from 1 mM KNO3 to 1 mM KNO3 with or without mannitol [data not shown]). These findings show that osmotic stress alone or in combination with NO3- enrichment is not sufficient to stimulate a characteristic SIMR.. . Fig. 4.. . Osmotic stress alone inhibits LR elongation but does not stimulate LR proliferation. (A-E) Seedlings grown on 10 muM KNO3 medium for 4-5 d were transferred to 1 mM KNO3 medium 100 mM mannitol for 21 d. Data are mean SE (n=20). * Significant difference (P 0.05) between unstressed and stressed roots (Fisher's protected LSD test). The data are representative of similar results in three independent experiments. Top, Middle, Bottom: the different segments of the segmented agar plate.. . . . . . Greater numbers of LRPs develop into LRs during the NO3--enhanced salt SIMR. It was next investigated whether development of LR primordia (LRPs) is affected during the NO3--enhanced salt SIMR. Seedlings were again grown on 10 muM KNO3 and transferred to plates containing 1 mM KNO3 with and without NaCl uniformly present across all plate segments. Visualization of LRPs was performed by staining with acetocarmine (Enstone et al., 2001) and the development of each primordium assessed by combining the detailed stages of LRP development assigned by Malamy and Benfey (1997) into four broad phases: (INT) initiation, (CP) cell proliferation, (PE) pre-emergence, and (E) emergence (Fig. 5A). Almost 60% of first order LRPs reached the E stage in stressed seedlings whereas the greatest proportion (42%) of LRPs in unstressed plants was still at the PE stage of development (Fig. 5B). Although similar numbers of INT stage LRPs in unstressed and stressed seedlings were observed, no CP stage LRPs in stressed seedlings were detected compared to 21% CP stage LRPs from unstressed seedlings. Similar results were observed with second order LRPs although, as expected, a greater percentage of LRPs from both unstressed and stressed seedlings were in the earlier stages of development than first order LRPs (Fig. 5C). Nevertheless, the highest proportion of second order LRPs in stressed plants was at the E stage of development whereas the greatest percentage of LRPs in unstressed plants was at the PE stage. These results suggest that while the proportion of LRPs being initiated in both unstressed and stressed plants is similar, the overall increase in LR number in stressed roots (Fig. 5D) is either due to the arrest of a proportion of LRPs in unstressed plants at the pre-emergence stage of development or, alternatively, LRPs in stressed roots develop at a faster rate.. . Fig. 5.. . LRP development during the NO3--enhanced salt SIMR. Seedlings grown on 10 muM KNO3 medium for 4-5 d were transferred to 1 mM KNO3 medium 50 mM NaCl for 8 d. (A) Stages of LRP development visualized by acetocarmine staining. INT, Initiation; CP, cell proliferation; PE, pre-emergence; E, emergence. (B, C) Frequency of first and second order LRP developmental stages, respectively. Stages of LRP development are indicated in the graph legend. (D) Total LR number. Data are mean SE (n=30). Tukey's post-hoc test showed a significant difference (P 0.05) in LRP developmental stages between unstressed and stressed roots. (D) * Significant difference (P 0.05) between unstressed and stressed roots (Fisher's protected LSD test). The data are representative of similar results in three independent experiments.. . . . . . NO3--enhanced, salt stress stimulation of LR proliferation is mediated by auxin. One of the major generic characteristics of root SIMR phenotypes is the increased proliferation of LRs (Potters et al., 2007). Auxin is a key regulator of LR development. It promotes LRP initiation by the local activation of root pericycle cells and also plays a role in LR emergence (Reed et al., 1998; Casimiro et al., 2001; Bhalerao et al., 2002; Marchant et al., 2002; De Smet et al., 2007; Okushima et al., 2007; Dubrovsky et al., 2008). It was therefore investigated whether the LR proliferation component of the NO3--enhanced salt SIMR is mediated by auxin, by testing if salt stress can still induce LR proliferation in (i) an auxin synthesis mutant, nit1-3 (Normanly et al., 1997) [NIT1 is one of three nitrilases that catalyse a biosynthetic step in one of several IAA biosynthesis pathways (Woodward and Bartels, 2005)]; (ii) auxin transport mutants, axr4-2, aux1-7 (Picket et al., 1990; Dharmasiri et al., 2006); (iii) auxin signalling mutants, axr1-3, tir1-1, eta3/tir1-1 (the eta3 background enhances the tir-1-1 phenotype) (Lincoln et al., 1990; Ruegger et al., 1998; Gray et al., 2003; Dharmasiri et al., 2005; Kepinski et al., 2005). All auxin mutants exhibited decreases in either, or both, unstressed and stressed LR number compared to wild-type (Fig. 6A). However, while the stimulation of LR proliferation under salt stress was observed in the axr1-3, axr4-2, nit1-3, tir1-1, and eta3/tir1-1 mutants, it was completely blocked in the aux1-7 mutant, suggesting that auxin transport, at least via AUX1, is essential for the LR proliferation component of the salt SIMR.. . Fig. 6.. . Salt stress affects auxin distribution in LRPs. (A-C) Total LR number, average LR length, and primary root length, respectively, of WT and auxin mutants transferred from 10 muM KNO3 to 1 mM KNO3 medium 50 mM NaCl for 8 d. Data are mean SE (n=20). * Significant difference (P 0.01) between unstressed and stressed roots (Tukey's post-hoc test). (D) LRP development visualized by DR5:GUS staining. Growth conditions were as described (Benkova et al., 2003). (E) Frequency of stained LRP. (F) LRP number per root system. Inset in (E), Total LR number. For (E), (F) and inset, data are mean SE (n=30). * Significant difference (P 0.05) between unstressed and stressed roots (Fisher's protected LSD test). The data are representative of similar results in three independent experiments.. . . . A clear trend showing a stress-induced decrease in average LR length could be observed in wild-type, axr1-3, axr4-2, nit1-3, and aux1-7 roots, although this decrease was not statistically significant except for the nit1-3 and aux1-7 mutants (Fig. 6B). No significant salt-mediated reduction in average LR length could be seen in the tir1-1 mutant, but this was due to a large decrease in unstressed LR elongation with little effect on stressed LR length. This phenotype was enhanced in the eta3/tir1-1 mutant. All mutants exhibited the wild-type inhibition of primary root elongation by salt stress (Fig. 6C). Overall, the results suggest that auxin does not play a role in the root elongation component of the salt SIMR but is important for LR elongation under unstressed conditions.. Our results indicate that at least auxin transport is essential for the salt-mediated stimulation of LR proliferation. AUX1 is an influx carrier that imports auxin into developing LRPs to regulate both LRP initiation and emergence (Marchant et al., 1999, 2002; Swarup et al., 2001; Yang et al., 2006). To test whether the LR proliferation component of the NO3--enhanced salt SIMR is associated with increased auxin accumulation, expression of the GUS reporter gene, driven by the auxin-sensitive DR5 promoter, was examined in developing LRPs. DR5 is an established indirect marker for auxin accumulation and is expressed from the earliest stages of LRP development (Ulmasov et al., 1997; Benkova et al., 2003; Dubrovsky et al., 2008). It was possible to detect LRP developmental stages INT to E by histochemical staining for GUS activity (Fig. 6D). Remarkably, only 20% of LRPs in unstressed seedlings exhibited GUS staining while 70% of LRPs in stressed seedlings were stained (Fig. 6E). Moreover, twice the number of LRPs per root system was observed in unstressed seedlings compared to stressed seedlings, whereas twice as many LRs had developed in stressed seedlings (Fig. 6F and inset in E). Taken together, these results suggest that the development of a greater number of LRP's is arrested in the absence of salt stress; the corollary being that salt stress stimulates the development of a larger proportion of LRPs and that this stimulation is associated with increased auxin accumulation in the LRPs. This finding correlates well with our observation that, while a similar proportion of LRPs in unstressed and stressed seedlings are initiated, a greater percentage of LRPs in roots of stressed seedlings reach developmental stage E than in unstressed seedlings where a proportion of LRPs appear to be arrested at the CP or PE stages (Fig. 5B, C).. . . ABA and an ethylene signalling factor regulate NO3--enhanced, salt stress stimulation of LR proliferation. In contrast to auxin, ABA exerts an inhibitory effect on LR development at the post-emergence stage (De Smet et al., 2003, 2006). Evidence suggests that ABA action on root development may require, at least in part, a functioning ethylene signalling network and that ABA inhibition of root growth is attenuated in ethylene signalling mutants such as ein2 and etr1 (Beaudoin et al., 2000; Ghassemian et al., 2000; Cheng et al., 2002). It was therefore investigated whether ABA or ethylene signalling play a role in the NO3--enhanced salt SIMR by testing whether salt stress leads to a different phenotype from the wild type in the following ABA and ethylene mutants: (i) ABA synthesis mutants, aba2-1, aba3-1 (Leon-Kloosterziel et al., 1996; Schwartz et al., 1997); (ii) the ABA signalling mutant, abi4-1 (Finkelstein, 1994; Soderman et al., 2000); (iii) ethylene signalling mutants, ein2-1, etr1-3 (Guzman and Ecker, 1990; Chang et al., 1993).. The aba2-1 mutant produced a greater number of first order LRs than the wild type in both unstressed and stressed seedlings (Fig. 7A) consistent with the inhibitory role of ABA in LR development. However, NO3--enhanced salt stress stimulation of first order LR proliferation was completely abrogated in this mutant. The slightly weaker aba3-1 mutant (Leon-Kloosterziel et al., 1996) also displayed no significant difference in first order LR number between unstressed and stressed seedlings. The ein2-1 mutant exhibited a similar phenotype to the aba2-1 mutant with greater numbers of first order LRs in unstressed and stressed seedlings but no stimulation of first order LR proliferation in stressed seedlings. By contrast, salt stress stimulated first order LR proliferation in the abi4-1 and etr1-3 mutants. These results suggest that ABA synthesis is required for the first order LR proliferation component of the salt SIMR, that ABI4 is not involved in the signalling network and that at least one factor involved in the ethylene signal network is required.. . Fig. 7.. . ABA and an ethylene signalling factor regulate the LR proliferation component of the NO3--enhanced salt SIMR. (A-D) Seedlings of wild-type, ABA mutants, and ethylene mutants grown on 10 muM KNO3 medium for 4-5 d were transferred to 1 mM KNO3 medium 50 mM NaCl for 12 d. Data are mean SE (n=20). * Significant difference (P 0.01) between unstressed and stressed roots (Tukey's post-hoc test). The data are representative of similar results in three independent experiments.. . . . Figure 7B shows that the response of second order LRs was different from that of first order LRs. Second order LRs were almost only observed in stressed roots in both wild-type and mutant seedlings. Both the aba mutants and the etr1-3 mutant exhibited a similar number of LRs to the wild type, whereas the abi4-1 and ein2-1 mutants displayed greater LR proliferation. These findings suggest that second order LRs are regulated in a different manner to first order LRs.. All the ABA and ethylene signalling mutants exhibited wild-type phenotypes of salt-mediated inhibition of LR and primary root length (Fig. 7C, D) suggesting that the root elongation component of the salt SIMR does not involve ABA or ethylene signalling..
