ResultsAtCWINV4 is highly expressed in nectariesBy microarray analysis, AtCWINV4 was previously identified as having a largely nectary-specific expression profile in wild-type plants (Kram et al., 2009). To determine if other invertase genes shared similar expression patterns to AtCWINV4, raw normalized probe set signal intensity data (Kram et al., 2009) were examined. A total of nine invertase genes, including AtCWINV4, were identified as being confidently expressed in Arabidopsis nectaries (see Supplementary Table S1 at JXB online; Kram et al., 2009); however, AtCWINV4 was the only invertase gene that displayed extreme up regulation in nectaries via microarray (see Supplementary Table S1 at JXB online). Moreover, AtCWINV4 was the sole nectary-expressed invertase predicted to be localized to the cell wall (based on TAIR annotation; prediction due to shared sequence similarity with known cell wall invertases). AtCWINV4 encodes a 591 amino acid protein with a theoretical molecular mass of 67 412.2 Da. PSORT analysis (Nakai and Kanehisa, 1991) predicted AtCWINV4 to be secreted from the cell via a 22 amino acid signal peptide, which would be consistent with cell wall localization.To confirm the nectary-enriched expression of AtCWINV4, reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was performed on RNA isolated from 11 major tissues, including nectaries. Results shown in Fig. 1A demonstrate that AtCWINV4 was highly expressed in both the lateral and median nectaries of flowers at pre- and post-anthesis (lanes 9-11); it was also expressed in pistils and roots at much lower levels. Similar expression patterns were also observed for a CWINV4 orthologue from Brassica rapa (BrCWINV4, Fig. 1B).Fig. 1.CWINV4 is highly expressed in nectaries. Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was used to examine the expression profiles of AtCWINV4 (A) and an orthologue from Brassica rapa (B; BrCWINV4, accession number GQ146458). The tissues examined in (A) included: (1) petal; (2) sepal; (3) rosette leaf; (4) stamen; (5) pistil; (6) root; (7) internode shoot; (8) silique; (9) mature median nectaries (Stage 14-15); (10) immature lateral nectaries (Stage 11-12); and, (11) mature lateral nectaries (Stage 14-15). (B) Tissues included: (1) petal; (2) sepal; (3) leaf; (4) stamen; (5) pistil; (6) root; (7) stem; (8) mature median nectaries; and (9) mature lateral nectaries. GAPDH (At3g04120) and a B. rapa ubiquitin gene (BrUBQ, accession number GR719937) were used as constitutively expressed controls. All B. rapa floral tissues examined were from the equivalent of Stage 14-15 Arabidopsis flowers. The images shown are the results obtained after 27 cycles of RT-PCR. (C) Bright field image of Stage 15 Arabidopsis flower expressing an AtCWINV4:GFP fusion, under control of the native AtCWINV4 promoter, and (D) GFP fluorescence derived from same flower. Sepals were removed prior to imaging. Re, receptacle; Pe, petal; LS, long stamen; MN, median nectary; LN, lateral nectary; scale bars, 100 mum.To examine AtCWINV4 expression further, a genomic fragment encoding AtCWINV4, including 1.8 kb of the promoter region, was cloned in-frame with GFP within the binary vector pORE-R4 (to generate AtCWINV4::AtCWINV4:GFP). Wild-type Arabidopsis transformed with this construct displayed nectary-specific GFP fluorescence (Fig. 1C, D). Examinations of these plants via laser scanning confocal microscopy further supported AtCWINV4 tissue-specific expression (see Supplementary Video S1 at JXB online), with GFP appearing to be expressed throughout the entire nectary. Although not definitive, confocal results (see Supplementary Video S1 at JXB online) also suggested that most fluorescence was localized to cell walls due to diffuse patterns of GFP accumulation, which appeared to outline nectary cells. This observation was in contrast to the well-defined localization of a plasma-membrane targeted GFP fusion protein in nectaries (see Supplementary Video S2 at JXB online; 35S::GFP:LTI6b fusion described in Cutler et al., 2000).cwinv4 mutant linesTo probe the biological function of AtCWINV4, two independent T-DNA mutant lines were identified, cwinv4-1 and cwinv4-2. cwinv4-1 had a T-DNA inserted in the second exon, whereas cwinv4-2 had an insertion 200 nucleotides upstream of the transcriptional start site (Fig. 2A). Significantly, cwinv4-1 was identified as a null mutant, whereas AtCWINV4 expression was greatly reduced in cwinv4-2 (Fig. 2B). Indeed, while AtCWINV4 transcripts were readily detected from whole flowers of wild-type plants following 30 cycles of RT-PCR, faint bands derived from cwinv4-2 cDNA were only visible at 35 cycles or greater.Fig. 2.Identification of cwinv4 mutants. Two independent Arabidopsis T-DNA mutant lines (Alonso et al., 2003), cwinv4-1 (SALK_130163) and cwinv4-2 (SALK_017466C), were obtained from the Arabidopsis Biological Resource Centre and genotyped to obtain homozygous mutant plants. The relative locations of each T-DNA insertion are shown in (A). RT-PCR, performed on RNA isolated from whole flowers, demonstrated that cwinv4-1 is a null mutant, and that AtCWINV4 is expressed significantly lower in cwinv4-2 flowers than in wild-type (B).cwinv4 flowers have decreased cell wall invertase activityOnce confirmed as mutants, both cwinv4-1 and cwinv4-2 flowers were subsequently examined for extracellular (cell wall) invertase activity. Invertases catalyse the hydrolysis of the disaccharide sucrose into glucose and fructose (Berger et al., 2007; Winter and Huber, 2000b). Cell wall extracts were prepared as previously described (Wright et al., 1998) from whole flowers of cwinv4-1, cwinv4-2, and wild-type plants. Both cwinv4 lines displayed large decreases in total cell wall invertase activity (Fig. 3), whereas intracellular fractions displayed similar activities to wild-type plants (data not shown). The higher cell wall invertase activity observed in cwinv4-2 than cwinv4-1 flowers was probably due to the leaky expression of AtCWINV4 in cwinv4-2 (i.e. cwinv4-1 is a null mutant, whereas cwinv4-2 is a knockdown mutant). It was also noted that cell wall invertase activity was not reduced to zero in cell wall extracts derived from flowers of either cwinv4 mutant. Whether this result is indicative of activity derived from other cell wall invertases, or represents minor contamination from intracellular invertases is unknown. However, it should be noted that whole flowers were used for these assays, not isolated nectaries (i.e. other cell wall invertases may be expressed in petals, stamen, etc).Fig. 3.Cell wall invertase activity is greatly reduced in cwinv4 flowers. Cell wall extracts were prepared from whole Stage 14-15 flowers (25 mg fresh weight) of wild-type and cwinv4 plants, which were subsequently tested for invertase activity. The results from one experiment with cwinv4-1 and cwinv4-2 plants are shown (n=3 independent preparations). Independent and repeated experiments with both cwinv4-1 and cwinv4-2 plants displayed consistent results, with varying amplitudes of total activity for both wild-type and mutant plants.cwinv4 mutants do not secrete nectarTo determine if mutations occurring within AtCWINV4 have an impact on nectar production, individual flowers were examined for the presence of nectar droplets, which accumulate inside the cups formed by sepals surrounding the lateral nectaries. Figure 4A illustrates a typical analysis, and shows a nectar droplet clinging to the inside of a sepal of a wild-type flower; nectar droplets were never observed within either cwinv4-1 or cwinv4-2 flowers (Table 2; Fig. 4B). Interestingly, extremely limited indications of secretion very rarely appeared inside the sepals of cwinv4-2 flowers; however, nectar droplets were never present (only a thin glistening film), and due to the extremely rare occurrence (c. 5% of flowers) and limited amount of fluid produced, these putative secretions could neither be collected nor analysed. If this rarely observed fluid truly represented nectar secretion, it would be consistent with the leaky expression of CWINV4 found in cwinv4-2.Table 2.Examination of nectar production in wild-type and cwinv4 flowersWild-typecwinv4-1cwinv4-2No. of flowers with nectara250/2500/2500b/250aFlowers were examined for nectar droplets accumulating inside sepals surrounding lateral nectaries. A minimum of ten individual plants were examined for each line.bExtremely limited indications of fluid very rarely appeared inside the sepals of cwinv4-2 flowers; however, no nectar droplets ever accumulated inside the flowers of these plants. These findings are in line with the leaky expression of AtCWINV4 found within cwinv4-2.Fig. 4.cwinv4 flowers do not secrete nectar. Nectar production in Arabidopsis flowers can be examined by gently peeling back the sepal. Nectar droplets accumulating within the sepal cups surrounding lateral nectaries (LN) were consistently present in wild-type plants (circled in A), whereas neither cwinv4 mutant secreted nectar (e.g. B; Table 2). Both cwinv4 mutants also accumulated higher than normal levels of starch within the receptacle (arrowheads), which often extended into the pedicel (C, D). Conversely, the stomata of wild-type nectaries stained heavily for starch (E, arrowheads), whereas those of cwinv4 flowers did not (F). The morphology of cwinv4 nectaries was examined to determine if aberrant nectary structure might account for the lack of nectar secretion. In all flowers examined, cwinv4 nectaries (H) appeared to have similar morphology to wild-type plants (G). Scale bars are 50 mum; LN, lateral nectary; SS, short stamen.cwinv4 flowers display altered patterns of starch accumulationInvertases play key roles in sugar source-sink relationships (Roitsch, 1999; Roitsch and Ehness, 2000). Thus, whole flowers were examined for altered patterns of starch accumulation via iodine-potassium iodide (IKI) staining. cwinv4 lines displayed an obvious increase in starch accumulation within the floral receptacle, which often extended into the pedicel (Fig. 4C, D). Conversely, wild-type flowers accumulated high levels of starch within nectarial stomata, whereas cwinv4 plants did not (Fig 4E, F).Nectary ultrastructure is normal in cwinv4 flowersScanning electron microscopy was used to examine if any defects in nectary development or morphology could account for the lack of nectar production observed in the cwinv4 mutant lines. Both mutant lines displayed all structural hallmarks of wild-type nectaries, including having multiple modified stomata (in an open conformation) and being covered by a highly reticulated cuticle (Fig. 4G, H). Confocal microscopy utilizing lipophilic fluorescent dyes (i.e. FM4-64) also demonstrated normal nectary morphology within cwinv4 flowers (data not shown).cwinv4 flowers accumulate less soluble sugarRelated to the starch analyses described above, it seemed logical to examine whether cwinv4 mutants displayed changes in the accumulation of soluble sugars. Simple sugars were extracted from whole flowers and assayed as previously described (Bethke and Busse, 2008). Results shown in Fig. 5 demonstrate that both cwinv4-1 and cwinv4-2 flowers accumulated significantly lower levels of soluble sugars, specifically sucrose and glucose, than wild-type plants. Notably, the overall ratio of glucose-to-sucrose was similar in wild-type and cwinv4 flowers (90% glucose and 10% sucrose in all lines examined, data not shown).Fig. 5.cwinv4 flowers accumulate decreased total soluble sugar. Whole flowers (Stage 14-15) from both cwinv4-1 and cwinv4-2 displayed significantly lower levels of total soluble sugar (sucrose and glucose) than wild-type plants (n=3, *P=0.027 and 0.013, respectively). Results are displayed as total absorbance per mg of floral tissue 100. The relative proportion of sucrose-to-glucose was similar between cwinv4 and wild-type flowers (data not shown)..
