Results. . Identification and characterisation of plants with an insert in FLA1. A T-DNA insert was identified in the intron of FLA1 (Fig. 2A) by screening the Feldmann T-DNA lines available from the ABRC using a PCR method [31]. Homozygous mutants (fla1-1) were identified by PCR and confirmed as a knockout mutant using RNA gel blot analysis (Fig S1). Segregation analysis on kanamycin selective media and DNA gel blots indicated this line has only one T-DNA insert (data not shown).. . 10.1371/journal.pone.0025154.g002. Figure 2. . Characterisation of DNA insertion mutants for FLA1.. A Schematic representation of the T-DNA insertion locus (black triangle) of fla1-1, located in the intron of FLA1 identified by screening the Feldmann mutant lines (WS ecotype), and fla1-2, located in exon 1 (SALK insertion mutant, COL ecotype). B Phenotypic comparison of six-week-old WS and fla1-1 mutant Arabidopsis plants grown in soil. Appearance of key developmental stages (days) of seedlings on plates (C) and pots (D) according to Boyes et al. [32].. . . . Homozygous mutant fla1-1 plants were grown under standard conditions to determine if they differed from wild-type (WS ecotype) plants. No obvious growth phenotypes were observed in fla1-1 mutants compared to wild-type (Fig. 2B). A more detailed analysis was performed based on the stages and growth descriptions outlined in Boyes et al. [32]. As many of the later stages of growth, such as leaf size and plant height, are highly variable, the most reliable growth stages were used in this analysis [32]. Comparison of fla1-1 and wild-type seedlings during 14 d growth on plates showed no significant difference in rate of shoot growth (Fig. 2C). For the soil-based assay rosette growth and two key stages of flower development (appearance of the first inflorescence meristem and opening of the first flower (stage 13 [33]) were compared (Fig 2D). No significant differences were observed between wild-type and fla1-1 mutants (Fig. 2C, D).. . . Response of the fla1-1 mutant to shoot development. In an attempt to uncover a phenotype for fla1-1, a directed approach was used based on the significant increase in FLA1 mRNA based on RNA gel blot analysis of tissue during callus and shoot induction experiments [5]. To determine if FLA1 was important for shoot development, fla1-1 mutants and wild-type plants were tested for their ability to produce new shoots and roots from callus. Arabidopsis roots, from the zone of maturation (region containing root hairs), from 14 d mutant and wild-type plants were cut into explants, transferred first to CIM and then to SIM [34]. After 4 d CIM and 14 d SIM treatment the fla1-1 mutant tissue had a reduced number of green foci and shoots compared to wild-type (Fig. 3A, C and Table 1). New shoots were scored based on i) leaf or root like morphology that was > 1 mm in length and ii) a distinct emergence point from the root, such that if multiple leaf-like projections were growing from a major callus, this was only counted as one shoot. Some root explants of fla1-1 could still form shoots (Fig. 3C, D), however, a significant reduction in the formation of both shoots ( 49%) and roots ( 15%) was consistently observed (Table 1). Some variation is seen in the number and size of shoots between experiments, but the difference between wild-type and mutant is always apparent from the colour of the tissue (yellow vs green) without the need to count new shoots. The yellow vs green difference is clearly shown in Fig 3E, F, but is not always apparent in photographs (Fig 3 A, C).. . 10.1371/journal.pone.0025154.g003. Figure 3. . Shoot induction phenotypes of fla1 mutants.. A-D Wild-type and fla1-1 mutant root explants after 4 d treatment on callus induction medium (CIM) then 14 d incubation on shoot induction medium (SIM). (A and B) Wild-type (WS) and (C and D) fla1-1 mutant root explants. (A and C). Root explants from the zone of maturation of the primary root where lateral roots were forming were incubated on CIM then transferred to SIM. (B and D) Four representative root explants (indicated on (A) and (C) by an asterisk) from the zone of maturation of wild-type (B) and fla1-1 mutant (D) roots after CIM and SIM treatment. The long arrows indicate the base of a new shoot and the arrowheads indicate the tip of a new root. 13 independent experiments comparing WS and fla1-1 were performed. (E) Wild type and (F) mutant root segments after only 1 d on CIM, followed by 14 d SIM. (G) Wild-type (WS) and fla1-1 mutant root explants after 4 d on CIM then 14 d SIM. (H) Wild-type (COL) and fla1-2 mutant root explants after 4 d on CIM then 14 d SIM. Experiments comparing COL and fla1-2 were repeated three times, and WS2 and fla1-1 were also compared in each of these three experiments. Scale bar is 1 mm.. . . . . 10.1371/journal.pone.0025154.t001. Table 1. . Shoot and root regeneration of wild-type and fla1-1 mutants.. . . . . . . . . . . . . Shoots. Roots. . . . . wild-type. 2.30.4. 4.30.3. . . . fla1-1. . 1.10.2 *. 3.70.3 *. . . . . . . . The average number of shoot (or root)-like growths per root segment ( standard error), that have a distinct point of emergence from the callus and are greater than 1 mm in length. The data were collected from several different plates (after CIM and SIM treatment), and a total of 109 shoot-like projections were counted for each of wild-type and mutant tissue. The asterisk indicates a statistically significant difference between wild-type and fla1-1 (t-test; P<0.05).. . . . To determine how early in the shoot induction process FLA1 is required we reduced the time of CIM treatment. Wild-type and fla1-1 mutant root explants were incubated on CIM for 1, 2, 3 or 4 d then transferred to SIM for 14 d. One day on CIM, followed by 14 days on SIM, is all that is required to observe a difference between fla1-1 mutant and wild type tissue (Fig. 3E, F).. An additional fla1 allele was obtained to determine if a defect in callus initiation was also observed. The fla1-2 allele was identified in the SALK lines (SALK_058964) [35] and contains a T-DNA insert in the first exon, 108 bp downstream of the ATG (Fig. 2A). The fla1-2 allele is a knockout mutant as shown by RNA gel blot analysis (Fig. S1). This allele exists in the Columbia (COL) ecotype and the ability to form callus was compared. The COL ecotype showed a decreased ability to regenerate shoots compared to the WS ecotype and the fla1-2 allele showed a similar number of shoots to the WS ecotype (Fig. 3G, H). Differences in the ability of Arabidopsis ecotypes to form callus has been reported and the regeneration capacity for both WS and COL varies depending on the experimental conditions [29], [36]. It is possible that ecotype specific regulatory factors, such as different promoter elements and/or differential transcription factors, are involved in shoot regeneration and the loss of FLA1 gene produces different phenotypes in different genetic backgrounds dependent on these factors (see Discussion).. . . Light microscopy analysis of callus and shoot induced tissue. Toluidine blue stained tissue sections of wild-type WS and fla1-1 root explants after 0, 2, 4 d CIM and 7 and 14 d SIM treatment were analysed by light microscopy to examine cell structure and organisation (Fig. 4). During CIM treatment the pericycle cells divide, expanding the diameter of the vascular bundle [27]. The pericycle cells in both the wild-type and fla1-1 mutant roots have undergone division after 2 d, however after 4 d CIM treatment the fla1-1 mutant has fewer divisions (compare Fig. 4B and C with Fig. 4G and H). After CIM and SIM treatment the root segments from fla1-1 mutants appeared as a disorganised mass of cells, as did the wild-type root segments, however, the mutants showed fewer dense centres of radial organisation (see arrows, Fig. 4D, E and J) which are thought to be sites of presumptive meristem formation [27]. These results indicate FLA1 may be acting in the early stages of re-differentiation.. . 10.1371/journal.pone.0025154.g004. Figure 4. . Light microscopy of wild-type and fla1-1 root explants after CIM and SIM treatment.. Sections through a region of WS (A to E) and fla1-1 (F to J) root explants. Transverse sections through the differentiated zone of a 14 d wild-type (A) and fla1-1 mutant (F) root. Transverse sections through root explants incubated on CIM for 2 d (B and G) and 4 d (C and H). Wild-type (D and E) and fla1-1 mutant (I and J) root explants after 4 d CIM and 7 d (D and I) or 14 d (E and J) SIM treatment. Centres of radial organisation which are presumptive sites of meristem formation are indicated by arrows. Sections were stained with toluidine blue. Scale is 0.1 mm; P, pericycle.. . . . . . fla1 mutants show increased numbers of lateral roots. Shoot regeneration has many features in common with lateral root primordia formation [28], [29], [30]. To determine if FLA1 also plays a role in lateral root formation we analysed the number of lateral roots in fla1 mutants and wild-type. Both fla1-1 and fla1-2 alleles showed a small but significant increase in the number of lateral roots compared to the respective wild-types (Fig. 5B). In addition, the length of the primary root was also slightly increased in both fla1 mutants (Fig 5A). To gain further understanding of the role of FLA1, both in root and shoot development, we fused the FLA1 promoter from the WS ecotype to the GUS reporter gene (FLA1p:GUS).. . 10.1371/journal.pone.0025154.g005. Figure 5. . Comparison of root phenotypes of fla1 mutant alleles in different genetic backgrounds.. A Length of primary root (cm) of wild-type (WS), fla1-1, wild-type (COL) and fla1-2. Significance levels a and b (P<0.01) are based on Tukey's post test (1-way analysis of variance). B Number of lateral roots of wild-type (WS), fla1-1, wild-type (COL) and fla1-2. Number of seedlings analysed was n=12, 14, 13, 14 for WS, fla1-1, COL, fla1-2 respectively. Significance levels a and c (P<0.01), others (P<0.05), are based on Tukey's post test (1-way analysis of variance). Error bars represent standard deviation of the mean.. . . . . . FLA1 expression is developmentally regulated. The expression pattern of FLA1 was investigated using FLA1p:GUS lines. Six independent lines were analysed in the T2 generation to check for consistency of GUS staining in the major tissues of seedlings (14 d) and mature plants (6-week old). One representative line is shown in detail. In the shoots of seedlings, GUS activity was visible in the petiole, in stomata and trichomes (Fig. 6A to C). In flowers FLA1p:GUS expression appears to be developmentally regulated (Fig. 6G to L). Expression was detected in the developing anthers of closed flowers and in the stamen filaments, but not in the anthers of open flowers (Fig. 6G and H). After fertilization, GUS activity was seen in the early embryos in the pistil (Fig. 6I). In contrast, in developing siliques, staining was detected in the vegetative portion (seed pod) and not mature embryos (Fig. 6K, L). Weak GUS staining was observed in the inflorescence stem (data not shown).. . 10.1371/journal.pone.0025154.g006. Figure 6. . FLA1 promoter:GUS analysis of 14 d plate grown seedlings and flowering, soil grown Arabidopsis plants.. GUS activity was detected in the A petioles and roots. B petioles and base, stomata and leaf hairs (trichomes, indicated by a white arrow) of young leaves. C stomata throughout the leaf and at the hydathode at the leaf tip (indicated by a black arrow). D lateral roots. E primary root, but only in the early elongation zone of the root tip. F developing lateral roots in the vascular and pericycle cells. G developing anthers of closed flowers. H stamen filaments (but not anthers) of open flowers. I early embryos of fertilised stigma and style, dissected from an open flower. GUS expression was observed in vegetative portion of developing siliques (J) including the stomata (K) and not in embryos (L). Scale bar is 0.1 mm, except in (C) where it is 0.03 mm.. . . . In roots, expression was detected in the mature vasculature of lateral roots and the elongation zone of the primary root, but absent from most of the primary root (Fig. 6D to F). In summary, FLA1p:GUS shows a developmentally regulated expression pattern in discrete tissues of the leaf petiole, stomata and trichomes, anthers and early embryos in flowers and primary root tip and lateral root primordia.. As callus initiates from a similar pathway to lateral root initiation the expression of FLA1p:GUS was investigated further. We previously investigated the up-regulation of FLA1 expression in root tissue after callus and shoot induction assays using RNA gel blots [5]. To provide more detailed analysis of the cell type-specific expression of FLA1 during this process, the FLA1p:GUS reporter was used.. . . FLA1p:GUS expression during callus initiation and shoot development. To characterise the regulation of FLA1 during root re-differentiation and shoot development in tissue culture, GUS activity was analysed in root explants after 0, 2, 3 or 4 d CIM and 3, 7, and 14 d SIM treatment (Fig. 7). Before CIM treatment (0 d) GUS expression is seen only in the lateral roots of 14 d seedlings (Fig. 7A) whereas after 2 d CIM treatment it was visible in some vascular and pericycle cells of the root explant (Fig. 7B). After 3 and 4 d CIM treatment GUS expression was seen in large sections of the root explant and lateral roots, throughout the vascular tissue and in expanding pericycle cells (Fig. 7C, D). After 3 d SIM treatment GUS expression was present in callus and vasculature of the root explant (Fig. 7E) and after 7 d on SIM GUS staining was no longer seen along the length of the root explant and appears in the pericycle and vascular bundle of newly forming roots (Fig. 7F, G). GUS expression was evident in the vascular tissue of newly formed roots after 14 d SIM (Fig. 7H). The up-regulation of FLA1 transcripts [5] and FLA1p:GUS expression during CIM treatment suggests FLA1 may be involved in initial stages of callus formation in the lateral root initiation pathway.. . 10.1371/journal.pone.0025154.g007. Figure 7. . FLA1 promoter:GUS analysis of Arabidopsis root explants after CIM and SIM treatment.. GUS activity was detected in the A lateral roots of 14 d Arabidopsis seedlings before incubation on CIM and SIM (see also Fig. 6). B some vascular and pericycle cells in root explant after 2 d CIM. C along the length of the root explant in the vasculature and de-differentiating pericycle cells after 3 d and 4 d (D) CIM treatment. E in callus and vascular tissue of root explant after 4 d CIM and 3 d SIM. (F and G) in the vascular tissue and pericycle cells of newly forming roots after 4 d CIM and 7 d SIM. H in the vascular tissue of newly formed roots of root explants after 4 d CIM and 14 d SIM. Scale bar is 0.1 mm..
