Results. . Line decreased initial decreased ethylene decreased low light angle 1 (ddd1) has reduced hyponasty due to impaired cell expansion under ethylene treatment. . Arabidopsis line ddd1 was isolated in a forward genetic screen of 35S-CaMV promoter-tagged plants (Weigel et al., 2000), based on its decreased petiole angle phenotype (Polko et al., 2012a). Due to its constitutively reduced petiole angles and decreased responsiveness to both 6h ethylene and 6h low light, the line was initially named decreased initial angle decreased ethylene angle decreased low light angle 1 (ddd1). In the vegetative stage, the distinctive phenotype of ddd1 included compact rosettes, broader leaf blades, and shorter petioles compared to Col-0 plants (Fig. 1A, B). Detailed analysis of ddd1 leaf movement kinetics, using time-lapse photography, confirmed that hyponastic growth upon ethylene and low-light treatment was reduced and that this was the case throughout the duration of the experiment (24h) (Fig. 1C-E and Supplementary Fig. S1A). Moreover, induction of the response appears to be moderately delayed by about 1h. In addition, supra-optimal temperature (heat) also resulted in a reduced response in ddd1 (Supplementary Fig. S1B), suggesting that a general genetic determinant of hyponastic growth is affected in this line. To check whether reduced hyponasty in ddd1 could be attributed to mechanical constraints imposed by its compact phenotype and short petioles, its response to spectral (green) shade was assessed. Spectral shade mimics dense canopy conditions leading to hyponasty and petiole elongation (Pierik et al., 2005). Despite the initial difference between petiole angles of Col-0 and ddd1 at the start of the experiment, the 24-h green shade exposure resulted in a comparable increase in petiole angles of both genotypes (Fig. 2A-E). This implies that ddd1 has the potential to show hyponastic growth and indicates that the reduced response to ethylene, low light, and heat is not due mechanical constraints.. . Fig. 1.. . Reduced hyponasty in ddd1. (A, B) Visual phenotypes of Col-0 (A) and ddd1 (B) in control conditions. (C) Kinetics of Col-0 and ddd1 petiole angle in ethylene (mean  SE; n > 10). (D, E) Typical leaf angle phenotype of Col-0 (D) and ddd1 (E) after 10h of ethylene treatment.. . . . . Fig. 2.. . Hyponastic growth under spectral (green) shade. (A) Col-0 and ddd1 plants in control conditions and after 24h of green shade exposure. (B) Petiole angles in control conditions and upon green shade treatment. Data points represent means  SE of petiole angles (n = 40). Asterisks indicate significant differences relative to petiole angle in control-treated plants (P < 0.05) (this figure is available in colour at JXB online).. . . . Ethylene-induced hyponasty depends on unequal growth rates between two sides of the petiole and is driven by local stimulation of cell expansion at the abaxial side of the organ (Polko et al., 2012b). First, the current study tested whether the substantially reduced hyponasty in ddd1 was visible at a cellular level. To do so, cell lengths were measured in epidermal imprints of 1-cm-long petioles after 10h of ethylene and control treatment. Wild-type plants, treated with ethylene, showed increased cell lengths in the proximal ~2mm at the abaxial side of the petiole compared to control (Polko et al., 2012b). However, this study observed no difference in cell lengths after ethylene treatment in ddd1 (Fig. 3A, B), indicating that the reduced hyponastic response is accompanied by a lack of local cell expansion in response to ethylene.. . Fig. 3.. . Epidermal cell lengths of 1-cm-long petioles of the ddd1 line. Data points represent means  SE of cell lengths at the adaxial (A) and abaxial (B) sides of petioles after 10h of ethylene and control treatment (n = 12-16). Asterisks indicate significant differences relative to the cell lengths of control-treated petioles (P < 0.05).. . . . . . The ddd1 line has reduced levels of ROT3 expression which does not affect ethylene sensitivity. To identify the genetic nature of the ddd1 phenotype, Illumina sequencing was employed (Polko et al., 2012a). This revealed that the T-DNA insertion is located on chromosome 2 in the fourth exon of ROTUNDIFOLIA3 (ROT3, At4g36380). Accordingly, ROT3 transcript levels were substantially decreased in ddd1 (Polko et al., 2012a). To confirm that the insertion in ROT3 is causal to the ddd1 phenotype, the previously described rot3-1 mutant (Kim et al., 1998) was examined. rot3-1 has a deletion of at least 1kb in the promoter region and the first intron (Kim et al., 1998). Analysis of petiole angles upon ethylene application showed that the rot3-1 mutant had a significantly reduced hyponastic response, comparable to ddd1 (Fig. 4B). Moreover, rot3-1 has compact rosettes, broad leaves, and shorter petioles, clearly resembling ddd1 (Fig. 4C, D). To confirm the genetic interrelation between ddd1 and rot3-1, this study performed a genetic complementation test by crossing ddd1 and rot3-1. All characteristic phenotypes remained in the F1 heterozygous offspring (Fig. 4C-E), indicating that ddd1 and rot3-1 are allelic. It was therefore concluded that ROT3 is required to mediate the effect of ethylene on cell expansion to induce hyponastic growth and, thus, subsequent experiments were carried out using the rot3-1 line.. . Fig. 4.. . Mutations associated with the ROT3 locus. (A) Schematic illustration of the insertion sites within the ROT3 locus. (B) Hyponastic growth phenotypes in rot3 mutants. Data points represent means  SE of petiole angles (n = 15). Asterisks represent significant differences between mutants and Col-0 (P < 0.05). (C-D) The phenotypes of ddd1 (C), rot3-1 (D), and F1 of a cross between the two lines (ddd1 and rot3-1) (E).. . . . Ethylene sensitivity and cell expansion can be studied using the so-called triple response assay, which in Arabidopsis consists of inhibition of hypocotyl elongation, exaggerated apical hook, and swelling of the hypocotyl in darkness (Bleecker et al., 1988; Guzmn and Ecker, 1990). To test whether impaired hyponasty of rot3-1 is due to a generally reduced responsiveness to ethylene, this study tested the mutants hypocotyl elongation in presence of exogenous ACC. In the absence of ACC, rot3-1 has significantly shorter hypocotyls in darkness, confirming interference of ROT3 with cell expansion. Upon growth inhibition by ACC, the reduction of hypocotyl lengths follows the wild-type pattern and remained significantly shorter up to 1 M. At higher concentrations rot3-1 hypocotyl lengths became similar to wild type (Fig. 5). This result suggests that general sensitivity to ethylene is unaffected in rot3-1 and that effects on hyponasty through ROT3 probably occur downstream of ethylene signalling.. . Fig. 5.. . Inhibition of hypocotyl elongation in darkness by 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid (ACC). Data points represent mean hypocotyl length of Col-0 and rot3-1 seedlings (n = 70-120). Asterisks indicate significant differences between the two treatments (P < 0.05).. . . . . . Brassinosteroid action is required for ethylene-induced hyponasty. . ROT3 encodes a member of the cytochrome P450 family, CYP90C1, an enzyme involved in the conversion of typhasterol to castasterone. The latter is the direct precursor of the bioactive BRs (Kim et al., 2004, 2005). To test whether BR biosynthesis plays a role in regulating ethylene-induced hyponasty, this study tested whether perturbation of BR synthesis reflects on the petiole angle. Brz is an inhibitor of cytochrome CYP450 function specifically in the steroid synthesis pathway (Asami et al., 2000). Its application resulted in reduced petiole angles in both control treatment and upon ethylene treatment. In addition, the ethylene-induced increase in petiole angle was significantly reduced by Brz (Fig. 6, P < 0.05). These results indicate that presence of BR modulates ethylene-induced hyponastic growth. To assess whether BR levels change in response to ethylene exposure in petioles, the concentrations of brassinolide and its direct precursors - castasterone and typhasterol - were measured in the petioles, after 6h of ethylene exposure and in control conditions. No measurable difference in any of the active BRs was observed (Fig. S2) which indicates that total BR levels do not change upon ethylene treatment and that the control of ethylene-induced hyponastic growth by BRs cannot be attributed to putative ethylene-mediated effects on BR synthesis via ROT3. Accordingly, ethylene did not induce transcription of neither ROT3 nor another BR biosynthesis-related gene, BRASSINOSTEROID-6 OXIDASE (BR6OX) (Fig. 7A-C). In fact, 3 and 6h after start of ethylene exposure, the expression of ROT3 and BR6OX declined. This was significant for ROT3 in quarter 2, which corresponds with the abaxial side proximal to the rosette where hyponastic growth is induced (Polko et al., 2012b). Since BR application to petioles in absence of ethylene does not affect petiole angles (data not shown) or general petiole growth, this study tested whether ethylene is capable of interfering with BR responsiveness/sensitivity using an alternative system that involves cell expansion: ethylene-induced hypocotyl elongation in light-grown Arabidopsis seedlings (Smalle et al., 1997). A range of 24-epiBL concentrations was applied to the medium and the effects on hypocotyl elongation under control and high ethylene conditions were examined. In addition, to separate effects of ethylene on biosynthesis from effects on BR responsiveness, a Brz treatment was included to inhibit endogenous BR biosynthesis. 24-epiBL application stimulated hypocotyl elongation in a concentration range between 0.01 and 1 M, but was much more effective in the low concentration range, between 0.001 and 0.1 M, in the presence of ethylene as compared to control air. Application of Brz alone substantially inhibited hypocotyl elongation in ethylene-exposed seedlings, which suggests a role for brassinosteroids in this process (Fig. 8, De Grauwe et al., 2005), consistent with observations described earlier for hyponasty. Exogenous 24-epiBL eliminated this response leading to comparable lengths of hypocotyls in ethylene and ethylene in presence of Brz.. . Fig. 6.. . Effect of brassinazole on petiole hyponasty of Col-0 in ethylene. (A) Data points show means  SE of petiole angles (n = 15). Asterisks indicate significant differences (P < 0.05) between brassinazole and mock treatment. (B, C) Visual appearance of plants after mock (B) and brassinazole (C) treatment (this figure is available in colour at JXB online).. . . . . Fig. 7.. . Brassinosteroid-related gene expression upon ethylene treatment. (A) Schematic representation of petiole quarters used for studies of gene expression. Petioles were divided into four quarters and expression measurements were performed separately for each quarter. (B, C) Expression of ROT3 (B) and BR6OX (C) after 3 and 6h of ethylene exposure. Data points represent the fold change of gene expression (mean  SE) after 3 and 6h of ethylene exposure relative to the control conditions and relative to beta-Tubulin-6. Asterisks indicate significant differences between results from ethylene and control treatments (P < 0.05) (this figure is available in colour at JXB online).. . . . . Fig. 8.. . Hypocotyl elongation in ethylene in the presence of different concentrations of brassinolide with ethylene and control treatment. Data points show hypocotyl lengths of Col-0 seedlings (n = 40-50). brz, Brassinazole..
