Results. . Identification of an acs7 knockout mutant. Previous analyses on the promoter activities of AtACS genes had revealed that, at any given growth stage, there is at least one ACS expressed (Tsuchisaka and Theologis, 2004), and that the expression of several ACSs can be induced by various hormones and stress conditions (Wang et al., 2005). As a pilot study, the promoter activities of the three types of ACSs in response to various abiotic stress conditions were surveyed (data not shown), in which the uniqueness of ACS7, the only type 3 ACS in Arabidopsis, was revealed. ACS7 was expressed in germinating seeds, and its promoter activity was elevated further following both salt and ABA treatment (Fig. 1A). By contrast, GUS staining was barely detected in other ACS promoter-GUS lines, such as pACS5:GUS during germination, except following the ABA treatment (Fig. 1B). Similarly, enhanced promoter activities were observed in 9-d-old pACS7:GUS seedlings following heat, osmotic, salt, and ABA treatments, while only a slightly enhanced activity was observed in pACS5:GUS lines following heat stress (Fig. 1C).. . Fig. 1.. . The unique expression pattern of ACS7 under various stress treatments. The seeds and 9-d-old seedlings of pACS7:GUS and pACS5:GUS lines were exposed to 43 C, 300 mM mannitol, 150 mM NaCl, and 20 muM ABA for 3 h, respectively, before histochemical GUS staining. (A) ACS7 was expressed in germinating seeds, and the expression was further induced by both salt and ABA. (B) By contrast, promoter activity of ACS5 was barely detected during germination, except following the ABA treatment. (C) The expression of ACS7 was enhanced following heat, osmotic, salt, and ABA treatments in 9-d-old seedlings, while the expression of ACS5 was only increased following heat treatment. There were three independent replicates with at least eight seeds and seedlings each to give the typical results. (This figure is available in colour at JXB online.). . . . To explore the possible involvement of ACS7 in abiotic stress adaptation, a FLAG T-DNA insertion line (ecotype Wassilewskija-4) was obtained with a T-DNA insertion in the third exon of the ACS7 gene (Fig. 2A). The homozygous mutant was confirmed by PCR (Fig. 2B) and RT-PCR (Fig. 2C). This line turned out to be the same acs7 line, acs7-1, used before (Tsuchisaka et al., 2009).. . Fig. 2.. . Molecular characterization of the acs7 mutant. (A) The T-DNA was inserted into the third exon of the ACS7 gene. The black boxes represent exons and the lines represent introns. (B) Homozygous mutants were identified by PCR using primers annealing to genomic DNA (LP and RP) and left border of the T-DNA (LB). (C) The knockout of ACS7 was confirmed in acs7 by RT-PCR using TIP41-LIKE as a control.. . . . In 3-d-old etiolated seedlings, ethylene emission of acs7 was reduced to approximately one-third compared with the wild type (Fig. 3A), suggesting that AtACS7 may have a major contribution to the production of ethylene in growing etiolated seedlings.. . Fig. 3.. . The transcript levels of several ACSs and ethylene-responsive genes were repressed in acs7, with lower ethylene emission. (A) acs7 had lower ethylene emission. Data were means (SD) of three experiments and the level of significance was evaluated by Student's t test. (B) Transcript levels of ACSs in the wild type were normalized to the internal control, TIP41-LIKE. (C) Transcript levels of ACSs in acs7. (D) Transcript levels of ethylene-responsive genes in acs7. In (C) and (D), the transcript level of each gene was set to 1 in the wild type. There were three biological replicates with at least three technical repeats for each gene. Error bars SD.. . . . Previously, it has been shown that the expression of several ACS genes is regulated by ethylene in a feed-forward fashion (Barry et al., 2000; Giovannoni, 2001; Alexander and Grierson, 2002; Argueso et al., 2007). The transcript levels of all other ACS genes in acs7 were therefore analysed. Indeed, most ACSs, especially the ones that could form a hetero-dimer with ACS7, had reduced transcript levels in acs7 (Fig. 3B, C; see Supplementary Table S2 at JXB online), further supporting a role for ACS7 in ethylene production. Consistently, the transcript levels of ethylene-responsive genes, including ETR2 (ETHYLENE RESPONSE 2), ERF1 (ETHYLENE RESPONSE FACTOR 1), ERF2 (ETHYLENE RESPONSE FACTOR 2), AtEBP (ETHYLENE RESPONSE FACTOR 72), and HLS1 (HOOKLESS 1) (Wang et al., 2002; Christians and Larsen, 2007), were lower in acs7 compared with that of the wild type (Fig. 3D).. . . Phenotypes of the acs7 mutant under normal growth conditions. On plates, acs7 germinated slightly earlier than the wild type (see Supplementary Fig. S1 at JXB online), and had larger cotyledons and true leaves with higher chlorophyll level (Fig. 4A, B). The primary root of acs7 also grew faster than that of the wild-type (Fig. 4C). Since ethylene is known to regulate primary root elongation negatively (Rahman et al., 2001; Rzicka et al., 2007), both the wild-type and acs7 seedlings were subjected to a series of concentrations of ACC treatment, and their primary root elongation was recorded and compared with the untreated seedlings (Fig. 4C, D, E; see Supplementary Fig. S2 at JXB online). The difference in the primary root length between the wild type and acs7 was reduced by the application of ACC, suggesting that the accelerated primary root elongation was indeed due to the reduced endogenous ethylene level in the roots.. . Fig. 4.. . Phenotypes of acs7 seedlings. (A) Nine-day-old acs7 seedlings had larger cotyledons and true leaves. (B) Higher level of chlorophyll content was detected in acs7. (C) The acs7 seedlings had longer primary roots than the wild type, which could be restored by 1 muM ACC, the precursor of ethylene. (D) Four-day-old seedlings were treated with different concentrations of ACC for 5 d. The primary root length of the wild-type and acs7 seedlings was quantified. (E) Quantification of the primary root length of the wild-type and acs7 seedlings in (C). There were three independent replicates with six seedlings each. Error bars SD. The level of significance was evaluated by Student's t test. (This figure is available in colour at JXB online.). . . . . . Thermotolerance is enhanced in the acs7 mutant. Although ethylene has long been regarded as essential for abiotic stress responses (Morgan and Drew, 1997; Cao et al., 2007), few studies have focused on the impact of ethylene synthesis in stress adaptation. Hence, the responses of acs7 to abiotic stresses were evaluated in this study.. Previous studies have revealed the involvement of endogenous ethylene signalling in protecting plants from heat stress (Larkindale and Knight, 2002; Larkindale et al., 2005). Mutants in ethylene biosynthesis, however, have not been tested for their thermotolerance. To evaluate the response of acs7 to heat stress, 4-d-old acs7 and wild-type seedlings were exposed to 43 C for 3 h in the dark (to avoid light-dependent oxidative damage). After being transferred back to normal growth conditions, the acs7 seedlings, having the lower percentage of cotyledon chlorosis (Fig 5A, B), were less damaged by heat, and were able to resume growth by producing new leaves (see Supplementary Fig. S3 at JXB online).. . Fig. 5.. . Enhanced thermotolerance was observed in acs7. (A) Four-day-old wild-type and acs7 seedlings were exposed to 43 C for 3 h in the dark, and then transferred back to normal growth conditions. acs7 exhibited enhanced tolerance to heat stress. (B) The percentage of seedlings with cotyledon chlorosis was scored over time. The acs7 seedlings were less damaged by heat treatment. All analyses were performed at least in triplicate. Error bars SD. (This figure is available in colour at JXB online.). . . . To analyse the molecular basis for the increased thermotolerance of the acs7 mutant, the expression of a number of heat stress-related genes was examined. These include heat shock transcription factors (HSFs) and heat shock proteins (HSPs), such as HsfA2, HsfB1, HsfB2a, Hsp70, and Hsp101 (Larkindale et al., 2005). Overall, these genes were induced more quickly in acs7 compared with the wild type (Fig. 6), indicating that the enhanced thermotolerance of acs7 at least partly resulted from the higher and earlier induction of HSFs and HSPs. In addition, the expression of multi-protein bridging factor 1c (MBF1c), a key regulator of thermotolerance upstream of ethylene signalling (Suzuki et al., 2008), was induced earlier in acs7 (Fig. 6), which might lead to earlier induction of the expressions of heat stress-responsive genes.. . Fig. 6.. . The expression of heat stress-related genes, including HsfA2, HsfB1, HsfB2a, Hsp70, Hsp101, and MBF1c, were generally induced earlier and to a higher level in acs7 following the heat treatment. There were three biological replicates with at least three technical repeats for each gene. Error bars SD.. . . . . . The acs7 mutant exhibits enhanced salt tolerance and accumulates more ABA under salt stress. It has been shown that 100 muM ACC treatment could enhance salt tolerance in Arabidopsis (Achard et al., 2006; Cao et al., 2007), and that mutants defective in ethylene signalling, such as etr1-1, ein4-1, and ein2-1, showed higher sensitivity to salt (Cao et al., 2007).. The salt stress tolerance of acs7 and the wild type was then analysed in two ways. Firstly, young seedlings were treated with 150 mM NaCl for a prolonged period of time, and their survival rate was scored over time. Compared with the wild-type, acs7 was much more tolerant (Fig. 7A, B). Secondly, germination kinetics was recorded over time for both the wild-type and mutant seeds, with or without 150 mM NaCl, or 300 mM mannitol. Although seed germination was postponed by salt and osmotic stress treatment in both the wild-type and acs7, the mutant still maintained higher germination rates over time (Fig. 7C, D). Combined, these data suggested that the absence of ACS7 enhanced salt tolerance in Arabidopsis.. . Fig. 7.. . acs7 exhibited enhanced salt and osmotic stress tolerance. (A) Five-day-old wild-type and acs7 seedlings were transferred to new medium supplemented with or without 150 mM NaCl and allowed to grow for 18 d. acs7 showed enhanced tolerance to salt stress. (B) Quantification of the survival rate over time. The seedlings were defined to be dead with the death of the shoot apical meristem. (C) Germination kinetics of the wild type and acs7 with or without 150 mM NaCl. (D) Germination kinetics of the wild type and acs7 with or without 300 mM mannitol. All analyses were performed at least in triplicate. Error bars SD. (This figure is available in colour at JXB online.). . . . The molecular basis for the elevated salt tolerance was then explored. Since salt stress adaptation is known to be mediated by multiple pathways and at both the transcriptional and post-transcriptional levels, the expressions of a number of marker genes, which are known to be salt stress-responsive at the transcript level, were monitored in a time-course study.. NHX1 encodes a tonoplast sodium/proton antiporter which is important for salt tolerance and ion homeostasis (Zhu, 2000; Yokoi et al., 2002). In unstressed seedlings, the transcript level of NHX1 was already higher in the mutant (Fig. 8). Expression of NHX1 in both the wild type and acs7 was quickly and significantly induced by salt, and acs7 maintained a high transcript level of NHX1 for a longer time. These results suggested that the salt tolerance observed in acs7 may be partly due to the enhanced osmotic tolerance mediated by NHX1.. . Fig. 8.. . The transcript levels of salt-responsive and ABA-related genes were induced earlier and to a higher level in acs7 by 175 mM NaCl. Three biological replicates with at least three technical repeats were done for each gene. Error bars SD.. . . . The transcription factor DREB2A is known specifically to interact with the DRE/CRT cis-element to induce osmotic stress-responsive gene expression (Sakuma et al., 2006). When unstressed, no difference in DREB2A expression was observed between the wild type and acs7. Nevertheless, the induction of DREB2A expression by salt was clearly earlier in acs7 (Fig. 8), very likely leading to an earlier activation of salt stress-responsive genes downstream.. The expression of RD29A is both ABA-dependent and ABA-independent (the latter mediated by DREB2A). Transcript levels of RD29B, RAB18, MYC2, and RD22 are all known to be regulated mainly through ABA-dependent pathways (Zhu, 2002; Chinnusamy et al., 2004). In acs7, expression of these genes was overall more induced by salt stress compared with the wild type (Fig. 8). The expression level of NCED3, which encodes a rate-limiting enzyme in ABA biosynthesis, was also higher in acs7 following salt treatment (Fig. 8).. Moreover, in order to test whether ABA accumulation contributed to the salt tolerance of acs7, the endogenous ABA levels of acs7 and the wild type at the 24 h time point following 175 mM NaCl treatment were measured with LC-MS. The ABA level in acs7 was higher than the wild-type seedlings under salt stress (Table 1). Meanwhile, when nordihydroguaiaretic acid (NDGA), the ABA biosynthesis inhibitor (Han et al., 2004; Liu et al., 2009), was supplied, acs7 seedlings became even more sensitive to salt compared with the wild type (see Supplementary Fig. S4 at JXB online). Since it is widely accepted that ethylene has a positive role in salinity adaptation (Achard et al., 2006), such a phenotype could thus have resulted from a reduction of both endogenous ABA and endogenous ethylene in the mutant.. . Table 1.. . ABA content was higher in acs7 under salt stress. . . . . Treatment. ABA content (pg mg-1 FW). . . . WT. . acs7. . . . . . Control. 1.160.03. 1.080.06. . . 175 mM NaCl. 7.390.26. 8.140.31*. . . . . . Nine-day-old seedlings of the wild type and acs7 were treated with 175 mM NaCl for 24 h. The seedlings with or without salt treatment were ground into powder in liquid nitrogen and sampled for ABA determination. Data were means (SD) of three experiments. The difference in ABA levels between acs7 and the wild type under salt stress was significant as evaluated by Student's t test.. . . . Combined, our results suggested that the loss of ACS7 confers salt stress tolerance mainly by promoting the ABA-dependent stress-responsive pathway and by endogenous ABA accumulation.. . . The acs7 mutant is hypersensitive to ABA. To analyse the possible changes in ABA level and response in acs7 further, a series of physiological measurements were carried out, including the ABA-mediated inhibition of germination, accumulation of proline and soluble sugar, and glucose sensitivity (Zhu, 2002; Len and Sheen, 2003; Carrari et al., 2004; Vinocur and Altman, 2005; Tuteja, 2007).. The germination sensitivity of acs7 seeds to exogenous ABA was evaluated first. Although no difference was observed in the final germination percentage between acs7 and the wild type, the germination kinetics was different; the acs7 seeds germinated faster than the wild type on control plates, nevertheless, 2 muM ABA clearly halted the germination of the mutant (Fig. 9A).. . Fig. 9.. . ABA related phenotypes in acs7. (A) acs7 was hypersensitive to exogenous ABA during germination. (B) Proline content was significantly higher in acs7. (C) Soluble sugar content was slightly higher in acs7. At least three independent repeats gave typical results. Error bars SD. The level of significance was evaluated by Student's t test.. . . . The 9-d-old and 19-d-old seedlings of the wild type and acs7 under normal growth condition were collected, and measured for their proline and soluble sugar contents. Both metabolites were higher in acs7, especially proline (Fig. 9B, C). Consistently, the transcript level of P5CS1, which encodes the rate-limiting enzyme in the biosynthesis of proline, was increased in acs7 (see Supplementary Fig. S5 at JXB online).. The germination assay on medium supplemented with high glucose gave consistent results. acs7 still germinated faster, yet immediately after radicle emergence, the seedling growth rate was strongly delayed by 6% glucose (Fig. 10A, B). On day 10, the percentage of the wild-type seedlings with true leaves was significantly higher than that of acs7 (Fig. 10C). Sucrose, however, does not have an impact on acs7 germination (see Supplementary Fig. S6 at JXB online).. . Fig. 10.. . acs7 was hypersensitive to high glucose. The seeds of the wild type and acs7 were sown on 1/2 MS medium supplemented with 6% glucose, and grown under normal growth conditions. The plates were photographed daily afterwards. (A) Accumulated anthocyanin was observed in 7-d-old acs7 seedlings. (B) High glucose inhibited the growth of 10-d-old acs7 seedlings. The experiment was performed in triplicate. (C) On 6% glucose, the growth rate of the wild type was higher than that of acs7. The number of seedlings with true leaves in (B) was scored. Error bars SD. The level of significance was evaluated by Student's t test. (This figure is available in colour at JXB online.). . . . The expression level of CYP707A2 was lower in the acs7 mutant, while genes involved in ABA biosynthesis (ABA1, ABA2, NCED3, ABA3, and AAO3) generally had slightly higher transcript levels (see Supplementary Fig. S5 at JXB online). Consistently, the expression levels of two ABA-responsive genes, RD29B and RAB18 (Saez et al., 2008), were also higher in acs7 (see Supplementary Fig. S5 at JXB online)..
