Results. . Melatonin Suppressed the Primary Root Growth in Arabidopsis by Reduced Root Meristem. To investigate the effects of melatonin on primary root growth in Arabidopsis, 3-day-old WT (Col-0) seedlings were transferred to new 1/2 MS media with different concentrations of melatonin for another 6 days (Figure 1). By measuring and statistical analysis, we found that the primary root length was decreased after melatonin treatment, and the inhibition effect of melatonin exhibited dose-dependent (Figure 1). The result suggested that high concentration of melatonin could suppress the primary root growth in Arabidopsis.. . FIGURE 1. . Effect of high concentration of Melatonin on the length of Arabidopsis primary root. After 3 days culture, seedlings were transferred to 1/2 MS medium with indicated concentrations of melatonin for other 6 days, and the primary root length were measured with software Image J. (A) Digital images of wild-type Arabidopsis seedlings treated with different concentrations of melatonin. Scale bar = 1 cm. (B) Primary root length of Arabidopsis growing on medium with control and increasing concentration of melatonin. More than 25 seedlings per experiment from three independent experiments were measured for statistic analysis. Values represent mean  SD, P < 0.01 by a Students t-test.. . . . In plants, postembryonic root growth is sustained by the root apical meristem (RAM), which consists of stem cell-like cells that are the precursors of all differentiated cell types (Laux and Mayer, 1998; Dinneny and Benfey, 2008). So we wonder if melatonin to reduce the primary root length by affecting root meristem. To test our hypothesis, 3-day-old seedlings were kept growing under different concentrations of melatonin for another 6 days, and we found that both the number of meristem cells and the length of meristem are significantly reduced with increased concentration of melatonin (Figures 2B,C), indicating that melatonin-mediated repression of primary root growth might be due to reduced root meristem.. . FIGURE 2. . Effects of Melatonin on the size of the Arabidopsis root meristem. Three-day-old seedlings were kept growing under different concentrations of melatonin for other 6 days. More than 25 seedlings per experiment from three independent experiments were cleared for imaging. Values represent mean  SD, P < 0.01 by a Students t-test. (A) Images of Arabidopsis root tips treated with melatonin for 6 days were present. Scale bar = 100 mum. (B) Comparison of root meristem length of the Arabidopsis seedlings treated with different levels of melatonin. (C) Quantification of root meristem cell number of seedlings treated with different levels of melatonin. More than 25 seedlings per experiment from three independent experiments were measured for statistic analysis. Values represent mean  SD, P < 0.01 by a Students t-test.. . . . Our data showed that 10 muM melatonin had no effect on primary root growth (Figures 1 and 2), and our previous work suggested that 10-50 muM melatonin had litter effect on endogenous melatonin content (Shi et al., 2015c). Therefore, we chose high concentration of melatonin for further analyses in this study.. . . Melatonin Negatively Regulated Auxin Biosynthesis. Since defective auxin response can cause reduced meristem phenotype, the first question we wanted to known was whether melatonin actually affects auxin biosynthesis. YUCCA (YUC) proteins, TRYPTOPHAN AMINOTRANSFERASE OF ARABIDOPSIS (TAA) family, TAA RELATED 1 and 2 play important roles in auxin (IAA) biosynthesis during plant development (Cheng et al., 2006; Yamamoto et al., 2007; Stepanova et al., 2008; Tao et al., 2008), so we investigated the effects of melatonin on the transcript levels of these genes (Figure 3A). Quantitative real-time PCR showed that the transcript levels of YUC1, YUC2, YUC5, YUC6, and TAR2 significantly decreased after 600 muM melatonin treatment. The transcript levels of YUC3, YUC4, YUC7, and YUC8 increased after treatment, while the relative expression levels of YUC3 and YUC8 in roots with treatment were less than 1.5-fold in control. Indeed, the endogenous IAA content in melatonin-treated roots was significantly lower than that of control (Figure 3B).. . FIGURE 3. . The effects of melatonin on auxin synthesis and IAA content in Arabidopsis roots. (A) qRT-PCR analysis of auxin synthesis related genes expression under control and 600 muM melatonin treatment. Relative fold changes of the expression of YUC1, YUC2, YUC3, YUC4, YUC5, YUC6, YUC7, YUC8, TAA1, TAR1, and TAR2 were quantified by real-time PCR, and the expression levels of the indicated genes in control roots were set to 1. Values represent mean  SD, P < 0.05, and P < 0.01 by a Students t-test. (B) IAA contents in the roots of seedlings grown on control medium or medium supplemented with 600 muM melatonin. Values represent mean  SD, and P < 0.01 indicate significant differences by a Students t-test.. . . . . . Melatonin Repressed Polar Auxin Transport in Arabidopsis. PINFORMED proteins, especially PIN1, PIN3, and PIN7, directly participate in auxin transport in plant roots (Friml et al., 2003; Blilou et al., 2005), and play important roles in controlling the size of root meristem. In order to examine whether melatonin treatment affected the levels of these proteins in root, we measured the relative fluorescence intensity of GFP using the marker lines PIN1::PIN1-GFP, PIN3::PIN3-GFP, and PIN7::PIN7-GFP. As shown in Figure 4, signals of PIN1 in provasculture, and signals of PIN3 and PIN7 deriving from both root cap and provasculture region were decreased significantly after 600 muM treatment. The quantitative real-time PCR demonstrated that the relative transcript levels of PIN1, PIN3, and PIN7 were also significantly reduced in melatonin-treated roots, suggesting that melatonin treatment repressed the expression of PIN1, PIN3 and PIN7. To further confirm the involvement of PINs in melatonin-mediated root development, the meristem length and cell number of the roots of PIN mutants (including pin1, pin3, pin7, pin3pin7, and pin1pin3pin7) were also determined. Notably, we found that the root growth of triple mutant pin1pin3pin7 was more tolerant to melatonin treatment than WT and other mutants (Figures 4D,E), indicating the essential role of PIN1/3/7 in melatonin-mediated repression of root meristem.. . FIGURE 4. . The expression of auxin eux components PINFORMEDS (PINs) were down-regulated after treatment of 600 muM melatonin. (A) Effects of Melatonin on the abundance of PIN proteins in Arabidopsis. Three-day-old seedlings harboring indicated markers were transferred to control medium or medium with 600 muM melatonin for 6 days. Scale bar = 100 mum. (B) Comparison of GFP fluorescence intensity in plants treated without or with melatonin as in (A) by Image J. The fluorescence intensity levels of the control roots were set to 1. Values represent mean  SD, P < 0.01 by a Students t-test. (C) qRT-PCR analysis of PIN1, PIN3, and PIN7 in Arabidopsis roots under 600 muM melatonin treatment. The expression levels of the indicated genes in control roots were set to 1. Values represent mean  SD, P < 0.01 by a Students t-test. (D) Quantification of relative root meristem length of various mutants treated without or with 600 muM melatonin for 6 days. Values represent mean  SD, P < 0.01 by a Students t-test. (E) Quantification of relative root meristem cell number of various mutants treated without or with 600 muM melatonin for 6 days. Values represent mean  SD, P < 0.05, and P < 0.01 by a Students t-test.. . . . . . Melatonin Repressed Auxin Response in Arabidopsis in an IAA Similar Manner. Endogenous auxin level is directly related to development of plant roots. To further dissect the underlying mechanism of melatonin during Arabidopsis root growth and the relationship between melatonin and auxin, exogenous IAA and auxin transport inhibitor (TIBA) were used to treat the seedlings. Firstly, 3-day-old seedlings were treated with melatonin containing medium in the presence or absence of 2 muM TIBA for 8 days. The root meristem length and cell number were measured. The results showed that both melatonin and TIBA treated roots reduced root meristem length and cell number, but the inhibition caused by melatonin was not intensified by the presence of TIBA (Figures 5A,B), indicating that polar auxin transport (PAT) might be necessary for the regulation of root meristem size by melatonin treatment.. . FIGURE 5. . Melatonin has similar effect as auxin on Arabidopsis root tip growth. Three-day-old seedlings of wild-type (WT) and indicated markers were transferred to control medium or medium with various treatments. Values represent mean  SD, P < 0.05, and P < 0.01 by a Students t-test. (A) Root meristem length of WT seedlings treated without or with 600 muM melatonin in the presence or absence of 2 muM TIBA for 8 days. (B) Root meristem cell number of WT seedlings treated without or with 600 muM melatonin in the presence or absence of 2 muM TIBA for 8 days. (C) Root meristem length of WT seedlings treated without or with 600 muM melatonin in the presence or absence of 0.5 or 100 M IAA for 8 days. (D) Root meristem cell number of WT seedlings treated without or with 600 muM melatonin in the presence or absence of 0.5 or 100 nM IAA for 8 days. More than 25 seedlings per experiment from three independent experiments were measured for statistic analysis. Values represent mean  SD, different letters represent significant difference by a Students t-test. (E) Endogenous melatonin levels in the roots of seedlings grown on control medium or medium supplemented with 0.5 nM IAA. (F) Effect of melatonin on auxin response in root tips of DR5::GUS marker line seedlings. Scale bar = 50 mum. (G) Effect of melatonin, TIBA and IAA on auxin response in root tips of DR5::GFP marker line seedlings. Scale bar = 30 mum.. . . . Since melatonin-treated roots had lower IAA levels (Figure 3B), we wonder whether the root meristem size was reduced by melatonin through decreasing IAA content. If so, the reduction of root meristem size could be complemented, or partially complemented by exogenous IAA at a certain concentration. Two concentrations of IAA (0.5 and 100 nM) were used to treat the seedlings. We found that treatment of 0.5 nM IAA for 8 days alone did not affect the root meristem size, but 0.5 nM IAA and 600 muM melatonin co-treatment significantly reduced the root meristem size, similar to melatonin-treated roots alone (Figures 5C,D). Application of 100 nM IAA caused reduced root meristem size, as previous reported (Rahman et al., 2007; Strader et al., 2011), but the inhibition of 100 nM was less severe than that of 600 muM melatonin. To our surprise, 100 nM IAA and 600 muM melatonin co-treatment led to a more serious decrease in root meristem size than that of 600 muM melatonin (Figures 5C,D). In the meanwhile, we examined the content of endogenous melatonin in the roots of control and 0.5 nM IAA treated seedlings, and found that 0.5 nM IAA treatment resulted in increased level of melatonin (Figure 5E).. DR5 promoter contains seven tandem repeat sequences of an auxin-responsive element, and it is widely used as a reporter for auxin signaling responses and auxin distribution in Arabidopsis (Ulmasov et al., 1997; Friml et al., 2003). After GUS staining, we found that the distribution of auxin was dramatically changed upon melatonin treatment, as it diffused into lateral root cap (LRC) cells from columella cells (Figure 5F). Similar results could be obtained by the observation of DR5::GFP line seedlings treated with melatonin for 5 days (Figure 5G) while 2 muM TIBA changed the expression pattern of DR5::GFP in root tips. In combination with melatonin, TIBA-induced auxin signals spread to LRC cells and adjacent meristem cells further (Figure 5G). Exogenous application of 100 nM IAA, but not that of 0.5 nM IAA, caused expansion of auxin signals to the lower part of LRC cells, similar to that of melatonin treatment. Interestingly, in association with melatonin, IAA-induced fluorescence signals spread to the whole distal tips of the roots below QC (Figure 5G), just like seedlings treated with higher concentrations of IAA as reported before (Ottenschlger et al., 2003), suggesting that melatonin aggravated the accumulation of auxin signals in the whole distal tips of roots, in an IAA similar manner..
