Results. . Identification of a slow-greening mutant. To identify the genes involved in chloroplast development, a slow-greening mutant, designated sg1, was isolated from an EMS-mutagenized population of Arabidopsis. The initial rosette leaves of sg1 were completely albino, but gradually became green (Fig. 1A). At ~3 weeks post-emergence, the leaves of the mutant were as green as those of the WT (Fig. 1A). The slow-greening phenotype was apparent in other newly formed organs of sg1, including the stems, inflorescences, and siliques. The young inflorescences and siliques of sg1 were white or pale green, and became green as they matured (Fig. 1B, C). These observations are consistent with a pigment deficiency in sg1, and therefore the levels of chlorophyll a and chlorophyll b were measured at different growth stages of leaf development. The sixth leaves of 3-, 4-, and 5-week-old sg1 mutant plants (exhibiting albino, pale-green, and green leaves, respectively) and the corresponding Col leaves were used. Consistent with their phenotypes, the chlorophyll contents increased as the leaves turned green; when the sixth leaves of 5-week-old sg1 mutants became green, the chlorophyll contents were markedly higher than those of the albino leaves, but lower than those of the WT (see Supplementary Table S1 available at JXB online). Over time, the chlorophyll contents of the mutant and wild-type leaves became comparable. At all growth stages, the mutant plants were smaller than the WT (Fig. 1A).. . Fig. 1.. . The phenotypes of the sg1 mutant. (A) Seedlings of the sg1 mutant and WT (Col) grown for 1-5 weeks in soil. (B, C) Inflorescences and young siliques of the Col and sg1 mutant. d, days after germination. Bars=1cm in (A); 0.5cm in (B, C).. . . . Many chloroplast-development mutants of Arabidopsis can grow well when supplied with sucrose as a carbon source (Koch, 1996; Chi et al., 2008; Yu et al., 2009); further, they may show abnormal embryo development (Uwer et al., 1998; Apuya et al., 2001; Kobayashi et al., 2007). To investigate whether SG1 is involved in chloroplast development, sg1 seedlings were grown on MS medium without or with 2% sucrose, and the sg1 embryogenesis of sg1 homozygotes was observed. It was determined that sucrose partially alleviated the albino phenotype of sg1, and also that embryogenesis of sg1 in heterozygote plants was delayed (see Supplementary Fig. S1 available at JXB online). The results suggest that sg1 affects chloroplast development during the early stages of seedling growth.. . . Differentiation of proplastids into chloroplasts. The delayed-greening phenotype of sg1 implies defective chloroplast development. Transmission electron microscopy was used to examine the chloroplast ultrastructures of the sixth leaves of 3-, 4-, and 5-week-old mutant plants (exhibiting albino, pale-green, and green leaves, respectively). In wild-type plants grown under normal conditions, the proplastid to chloroplast transition occurs at the shoot apical meristem during the early stages of development (Charuvi et al., 2012). Thus, in the present study, the chloroplasts of WT leaves at the same developmental stages were already differentiated and crescent-shaped, and contained well-developed thylakoid membranes with grana stacks (Fig. 2A, E, I). Starch grains were lacking in the chloroplasts of 3-week-old WT plants (Fig. 2A), but were present in the chloroplasts of 4- and 5-week-old plants (Fig. 2E, I). The albino leaves of 3-week-old sg1 seedlings contained few well-developed crescent-shaped chloroplasts, but many smaller, abnormal, irregularly shaped chloroplasts, similar to proplastids (Fig. 2B-D). These abnormal chloroplasts could be classified into three types according to their morphologies. The first type was rounded and highly vacuolated, with almost no thylakoid membrane, and appeared undifferentiated (Fig. 2B). The second type had fewer vacuoles and easily observable thylakoid membranes (Fig. 2C), possibly representing an intermediate form between the proplastid and chloroplast. The third type had discontinuous thylakoid membranes, resembling chloroplasts at an early stage of development (Fig. 2D). The pale-green leaves of 4-week-old sg1 seedlings contained differentiated chloroplasts that were smaller and had fewer thylakoid membranes than did chloroplasts of WT seedlings at the same growth stage (Fig. 2F-H); these chloroplasts resembled WT chloroplasts at an early stage of development. Some of the thylakoid membranes were discontinuous and some were arranged as grana stacks (Fig. 2F-H). Similar to the WT, the green leaves of 5-week-old sg1 plants contained chloroplasts with well-developed thylakoid membranes and grana stacks, and well-developed starch grains (Fig. 2J-L). The conversion of proplastids to chloroplasts in sg1 occurred over a period of ~3 weeks. These results suggest the delayed transition of proplastids to chloroplasts in sg1, consistent with a slow-greening phenotype.. . Fig. 2.. . Transmission electron micrographs of chloroplasts from the sixth leaves of 3- to 5-week-old Col and sg1 plants. (A, E, I) Chloroplast structures from the wild-type plants. (B-D), (F-H), and (J-L) Chloroplast structures from the sg1 mutant plants. Cp, chloroplast; SG, starch grain; Thy, thylakoid; Gr, grana thylakoids. Bars=1 mum.. . . . . . Gene cloning and complementation of sg1. . To verify whether sg1 is a nuclear recessive mutant, the M3 generation families of sg1 were crossed reciprocally with wild-type plants. Plants in the F1 generations of sg1 ()Col () and Col ()sg1 () were as green as the WT. The offspring of F1 plants from both of the crosses segregated in a 3:1 ratio (see Supplementary Table S2 available at JXB online). These results suggest that sg1 is a single recessive gene mutation with nuclear inheritance.. A map-based cloning approach was used to identify the mutated gene, by crossing sg1 with the Landsberg erecta (Ler) ecotype of Arabidopsis, to generate an F2 mapping population. SSLP markers (see Supplementary Table S3 available at JXB online) were selected for primary determination of the linkage group. On the basis of 21 F2 plants, it was concluded that SG1 was located on the upper arm of chromosome 3, in the interval between the markers NGA162 (7.24%) and GAPAb (16.24%) (Fig. 3A). Additional InDel markers and a CAPS marker (Fig. 3A; Supplementary Table S4 available at JXB online) were used to refine the position of SG1. On the basis of 146 F2 plants, the location of SG1 was narrowed down to an ~110kb region between the markers MIE15 and MYF24. In this region, only four genes encoding proteins predicted to be involved in chloroplast localization were identified, namely AT3G18230, AT3G18270, AT3G18390, and AT3G18420. Sequence analysis of the open reading frames of these four candidate genes revealed the existence of a single G to A mutation in base pair 542 from the start codon ATG of AT3G18420 genomic DNA; this mutation caused a conversion of arginine to lysine in amino acid 181 of SG1 protein (Fig. 3A). The expression level of SG1 in the sg1 mutant was determined, and it was shown that the G to A substitution did not affect mRNA accumulation (Fig. 3C). To confirm that the SG1 gene is AT3G18420, the sg1 mutant was genetically complemented with the full-length AT3G18420 cDNA under control of the promoter (1500bp upstream of the open reading frame) of AT3G18420. A total of 22 T1 transgenic plants were screened for pSG1::SG1 with a sg1 background. Subsequent phenotypic observations confirmed that the complemented mutants had WT traits (Fig. 3D). Further, the chlorophyll contents of 28-day-old rescued transgenic plants were similar to those of the WT (Fig. 3B), and ultrastructural examination of the chloroplasts from the sixth leaves of these plants revealed that they were well developed and similar to those of the WT (Fig. 3F). These results indicate that AT3G18420 can complement the chloroplast differentiation defects in the sg1 mutant, thereby further suggesting that AT3G18420 is responsible for the sg1 phenotypes. Two T-DNA insertion lines were obtained from the Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center. The T-DNA insertion harboured 296bp upstream of the ATG translation start codon in the SALK_046229C line, and 74bp downstream of the TAA translation stop codon in the SALK_026339 line. The results of RT-PCR indicated that the SG1 gene could be expressed in both T-DNA lines, without apparent effects on the chloroplasts.. . Fig. 3.. . Identification of the SG1 gene. (A) Map-based cloning, with the locations of molecular markers and mutation site indicated. (B) Chlorophyll concentration in mature rosette leaves of 4-week-old Col and overexpressing and complemented plants. (C) qRT-PCR analysis of SG1 transcription levels in sg1 and differently overexpressing transgenic lines with a Col background. (D) Seedlings of sg1 mutants, complemented (C-3#), and overexpressing transgenic plants (OE-1# and OE-2#) grown for 4 weeks in soil. (E) Inflorescences and siliques of complemented plants (C-3#). (F-I) Transmission electron micrographs of chloroplasts in 4-week-old leaves from Col, the complemented (C-3#), and overexpressing transgenic plants (OE-1# and OE-2#). Bars=0.5cm in (D, E); 1 mum in (F-I). Values represent the meanSD of three independent experiments. Asterisks denote significant differences (P < 0.05).. . . . To investigate further the function of SG1 in chloroplast development, a plasmid containing the full-length cDNA of AT3G18420, under control of the Cauliflower mosaic virus 35S promoter (CaMV 35S), was constructed, which was transformed to the WT. Thirty-one T1 overexpressing (OE) transgenic plants were screened, and no visible phenotypic effects were observed (Fig. 3C, D). The chlorophyll contents were measured and the ultrastructures of three OE lines were examined; it was determined that the content of chlorophyll a was slightly higher than that of WT plants (Fig. 3B). The chloroplasts of the OE lines were somewhat irregularly shaped, and had a slightly higher proportion of thylakoid membranes, especially in the grana; these characteristics may be responsible for the higher chlorophyll a content (Fig. 3B, H, I). The results indicate that SG1 plays an important role in chloroplast development.. . . Encoding of a conserved, widely expressed, chloroplast-localized TPR-containing protein by SG1. . Analysis of the complete Arabidopsis sequence by using BLAST revealed that the nuclear genome contains a single copy of the SG1 gene. The results of phylogenetic analysis and protein alignments indicated that SG1 was conserved during the evolutionary process; further, it shares significant identity with the (hypothetical) Arabidopsis proteins-AT2G37400, AT3G53560, AT5G02590, and AT3G09490-which are chloroplast lumen common family proteins (see Supplementary Fig. S2 available at JXB online). SG1 encodes a putative polypeptide of 316 amino acids, with four TPR motifs (see Supplementary Fig. S2B available at JXB online). To confirm the subcellular localization of SG1, the transient expression of the p35S-SG1-GFP plasmid was examined in living Arabidopsis protoplasts. As a control, Arabidopsis protoplasts were transformed with a plasmid containing only GFP, under control of the 35S promoter. The GFP signals were observed by using confocal laser-scanning microscopy. In the absence of transformation, only chlorophyll autofluorescence was detected (Fig. 4A). After transformation with the control vector, GFP signals accumulated ubiquitously in the cytosol (Fig. 4B). In contrast, in the p35S-SG1-GFP-transformed protoplasts, GFP signals were coincident with chlorophyll autofluorescence; further, some SG1-GFP fusion protein was observed accumulated as spots in the chloroplast, which may be important for its function (Fig. 4C).. . Fig. 4.. . Subcellular localization and expression profiles of SG1. (A) Protoplast from a wild-type plant. (B, C) Protoplast transformed with p35S::GFP and p35S::SG1::GFP. Left to right: fluorescent image of GFP, chlorophyll autofluorescence, and merged image of GFP and chlorophyll autofluorescence. (D) Expression profiles of the SG1 gene based on qRT-PCR analysis of SG1 transcripts in various organs. Seedling, 10-day-old seedlings; root, roots from 10-day-old seedlings; stem, stem only, with all leaves and inflorescences removed; cauline, cauline leaves; young leaf, the sixth leaves of 5-week-old plants; leaf, mature rosette leaves of 5-week-old plants; flower, flower clusters; young silique, siliques at 1 week after fertilization; silique, green siliques at >1 week after fertilization. Bars=10 mum. Values represent the meanSD of three independent experiments.. . . . Next, the expression profiles of SG1 was examined. The mRNAs were isolated from different tissues of WT plants, and the SG1 expression level was detected by using qRT-PCR. The housekeeping gene beta-tubulin, the expression levels of which remain similar across different tissues, was used to normalize different samples. The expression level of SG1 in 10-day-old seedlings was arbitrarily set to 1. It was determined that SG1 was widely expressed in all Arabidopsis tissues (Fig. 4D). The highest expression levels were observed in young siliques and flower clusters, while the lowest expression level was observed in roots (Fig. 4D). SG1 was ubiquitously expressed throughout the plant; however, its expression was preferentially associated with green tissues, particularly newly formed tissues. These results indicate that SG1 localizes to the chloroplast and exhibits ubiquitous expression.. . . Disrupted expression levels of genes associated with chloroplast development, photosynthesis, or chlorophyll biosynthesis. The TPR or TPR-related motif-pentatricopeptide repeat (PPR) proteins are reported to be involved in chloroplast gene expression (Pfalz et al., 2006; Chi et al., 2008; Su et al., 2012). Since abnormal chloroplast development was observed in sg1, the effect of the loss of SG1 on the expression of chloroplast-related genes was investigated using qRT-PCR. The transcription levels of plastid-encoded polymerases (PEPs) and nucleus-encoded polymerases (NEPs), which transcribe chloroplast genes, nuclear-encoded chloroplast genes, and chlorophyll biosynthesis genes, were examined in the albino, pale-green, and green leaves of sg1 plants, and also in the corresponding WT leaves (Fig. 5A-D). Three PEP genes, namely those encoding two members of photosystem II complexes (psbA and psbB) and a RuBisCO large subunit (RbcL), were selected (Fig. 5A). Three NEP genes were also selected, namely an accD, which encodes a carboxytransferase beta subunit of the acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACCase) complex, ycf2.2, which encodes a predicted chloroplast-localized ATP-binding protein, and rpoB, which encodes a chloroplast DNA-dependent RNA polymerase B subunit (Fig. 5B). Three nuclear-encoded chloroplast genes: RuBisCO small subunit (RbcS), light-harvesting chlorophyll a/b-binding protein (CAB2/LHCB1.1), and oxygen evolving polypeptide 1 (PsbO) were detected (Fig. 5C). Genes that are crucial to chlorophyll biosynthesis, namely CAO (encoding chlorophyllide-a oxygenase), HEMA1 (encoding glutamyl-tRNA reductase 1), and PORB (encoding protochlorophyllide oxidoreductase B), were also selected for detection (Fig. 5D). The expression levels of psbA, RbcL, accD, PsbO, and PORB showed very similar tendencies. The expression levels of RbcL, accD, and PORB (especially RbcL and accD) were markedly lower in the albino leaves of mutant plants than in the WT; however, the expression levels of all five genes gradually increased as the leaves became green, to reach higher levels than those of the WT (Fig. 5A-D). Nevertheless, the expression of the rpoB gene showed the opposite expression pattern. Its expression level was markedly higher in albino leaves than in the leaves of the WT; further, the expression level gradually decreased as the leaves grew, but remained slightly higher in green leaves than in the leaves of the WT (Fig. 5B). The expression of psbB, ycf2.2, RbcS, and CAO was a little higher in sg1 albino leaves than in the WT. These four genes and HEMA1 (lower in albino leaves) decreased in pale-green leaves while they increased when the leaves turned green (Fig. 5A-D). The expression level of CAB2 was lower in albino leaves than in the leaves of the WT; however, in pale-green and green leaves, it increased to approximately the same level as in the leaves of the WT (Fig. 5C). Thus, the expression levels of all four types of genes were affected in sg1. In addition, the soluble proteins were profiled in leaves of sg1 mutant plants at different growth stages. It was determined that albino leaves of mutant plants contained significantly lower amounts of RbcL and RbcS (Fig. 5E). As the leaves became green, the amounts of these two proteins gradually increased (Fig. 5E). The increase in RbcL was in accordance with the transcript data. On the other hand, the expression level of RbcS did not change in the albino leaves, despite a significant decrease in the level of encoded protein. Furthermore, in the green leaves of sg1, the expression levels of RbcL and RbcS were higher than those in the corresponding WT leaves; however, the protein levels were lower than were those of the corresponding WT leaves. Therefore, SG1 may also be involved in chloroplast protein biosynthesis and/or degradation.. . Fig. 5.. . Transcript and protein analysis from leaves of sg1 plants at different stages. (A-D) The expression levels of plastid-encoded polymerase (PEP) transcribed chloroplast genes, nucleus-encoded polymerase (NEP) transcribed chloroplast genes, nuclear-encoded chloroplast genes, and chlorophyll biosynthesis genes. (E) Total protein resolved by SDS-PAGE from leaves of sg1 and corresponding wild-type plants at different growth stages. The terms sg1-I, sg1-II, and sg1-III refer to the sixth leaves that exhibited albino, pale-green, and green leaves in 3- to 5-week-old sg1 mutants, respectively; Col-I, Col-II, and Col-III refer to the corresponding leaves in Col plants. Western blotting of beta-tubulin was used to confirm equal loading.. . . . . . Genetic interaction of GUN1 and GUN4 with SG1. To investigate further the putative pathways in which SG1 may be involved in chloroplast development, sg1 gun1 and sg1 gun4 double mutants were constructed by crossing sg1 with gun1-1 and gun4-1 mutants. Interestingly, both sg1 gun1 and sg1 gun4 double mutants alleviated the delayed-greening phenotype of sg1 (Fig. 6A). The leaves of the sg1 gun1 double mutant were of a similar green colour to the leaves of the WT plants (Fig. 6A). Further, this double mutant had no albino leaves, but the young buds and basal parts of the second and third inner leaves were slightly pale green (Fig. 6A). Similarly, few or no albino leaves were observed in sg1 gun4, and its mature leaves were completely green, unlike the pale-green phenotype of gun4-1 (Mochizuki et al., 2001; Larkin et al., 2003) (Fig. 6A). In both of the double mutants, the newly formed inflorescences and siliques were of a similar green colour to those of WT plants. The chlorophyll contents of 2-week-old Col, sg1, gun1, sg1 gun1, gun4, and sg1 gun4 seedlings were compared after removal of the cotyledons. It was determined that both of the double mutants had higher chlorophyll contents than did the sg1 mutant (Fig. 6B). The gun4 mutant showed chlorophyll defects; however, the chlorophyll contents of the sg1 gun4 double mutant were considerably higher than were those of the sg1 and gun4 single mutants while they were lower than those of the WT. The chlorophyll contents of the sixth leaves (at different stages) of these plants were also measured, and concurring results were obtained (see Supplementary Table S1 available at JXB online).. . Fig. 6.. . The gun1 and gun4 mutants alleviated the delayed greening phenotype of sg1. (A) Seedlings of Col, sg1, gun1, sg1 gun1, gun4, and sg1 gun4 grown for 1-4 weeks in soil. (B) Chlorophyll concentrations of 2-week-old Col, sg1, gun1, sg1 gun1, gun4, and sg1 gun4 seedlings with cotyledons removed. (C) Chloroplast structures of the sixth leaves from 3- to 5-week-old sg1 gun1 and sg1 gun4 plants. Bars=0.5cm in A; 1 mum in B. Values represent the meanSD of three independent experiments. aSignificantly different from Col, P < 0.05; ASignificantly different from Col, P < 0.01; BSignificantly different from sg1, P < 0.01.. . . . The development of chloroplasts in the sixth leaves of 3-, 4-, and 5-week-old double mutants was observed. As expected, the transition from proplastid to chloroplast in sg1 gun1 and sg1 gun4 double mutants was significantly advanced relative to that in sg1 plants, but slightly delayed in comparison with the WT (Figs 2A, E, I, 6C). In 3- to 5-week-old sg1 gun1 double mutants, the development of chloroplasts in the sixth leaves was the same as in WT plants (Fig. 2A, E, I; Fig. 6C, upper panels). In the 3-week-old sg1 gun4 double mutant, prophase chloroplasts formed, but the abundance of thylakoid membranes was lower than that in the corresponding WT plants (Fig. 2A, E, I; Fig. 6C, lower panels). Further, these chloroplasts were similar to those present in the sixth leaves of 4-week-old sg1 plants (Fig. 2G, H; Fig. 6C, lower panels). Mature chloroplasts were present in the sixth leaves of 4-week-old and 5-week-old sg1 gun4 plants (Fig. 6C, lower panels).. The expression levels of chloroplast-related genes were also quantified in 2-week-old Col, sg1, sg1 gun1, and sg1 gun4 plants. To eliminate the influence of green cotyledons, these were removed before RNA isolation was performed. The results showed that both gun1 and gun4 mutations in the sg1 background affected the expression of chloroplast-related genes compared with those in sg1. For example, both double mutants increased the expression levels of RbcL and accD (expressed at very low levels in sg1), and decreased the expression level of rpoB (expressed at much higher levels in sg1) (Fig. 7A-D). Also, the chlorophyll biosynthesis genes CAO and HEMA1 were increased in both double mutants compared with the WT and sg1 mutant (Fig. 7A-D). The levels of soluble proteins were profiled in 2-week-old Col, sg1, gun1, sg1 gun1, gun4, and sg1 gun4 plants (with cotyledons removed). Consistent with the observations of the alleviated phenotypes, the amounts of RbcL and RbcS in the double mutant plants were significantly higher than were those in sg1, but lower than were those in the WT (Fig. 7E). Subsequently the sg1 gun5 double mutant was constructed, and it was revealed that the mutation of GUN5 (with a function similar to that of GUN1 and GUN4 in retrograde signalling) did not alleviate the sg1 phenotype. On the contrary, it slightly enhanced the albino phenotypes of sg1 (see Supplementary Fig. S3 available at JXB online). Taken together, the present results indicate that the gun1 and gun4 mutations in sg1 may partially restore the disordered expression patterns of chloroplast relative genes, thereby alleviating the sg1 phenotypes.. . Fig. 7.. . Transcript and protein analysis of 2-week-old Col, sg1, sg1 gun1, and sg1 gun4. (A-D) The expression levels of plastid-encoded polymerase (PEP) transcribed chloroplast genes, nucleus-encoded polymerase (NEP) transcribed chloroplast genes, nuclear-encoded chloroplast genes, and chlorophyll biosynthesis genes. (E) Total proteins resolved by SDS-PAGE from different genotype seedlings. The mRNA and total proteins were isolated from 2-week-old plants with cotyledons removed..
